<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="what-is-xsd" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>What Is XML Schema (XSD)?</title>
  <shortdesc>XML Schema Definition (XSD) is a powerful schema language that describes the structure and data types of XML documents using XML syntax itself — offering far more precision than DTDs.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-04-05"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>XSD</indexterm>
        <indexterm>XML Schema</indexterm>
        <indexterm>XML Schema Definition</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Schema validation</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:xml-schema</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="xml-training" appname="chatbot" id="what-is-xsd"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT15M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="xml-schema"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="dtd-attributes-entities"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="why-xsd">
      <title>Why was XSD created?</title>
      <p>DTDs, while useful, have significant limitations. The W3C created XML Schema (commonly called XSD because schema files use the <codeph>.xsd</codeph> extension) to address them. XSD became a W3C recommendation in 2001 and is one of the two most widely used schema languages today (alongside RELAX NG).</p>
      <p>The key motivations for XSD were:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Data types:</b> DTDs treat all content as text. XSD provides 44 built-in data types — integers, dates, booleans, URIs, and more.</li>
        <li><b>Namespace support:</b> XSD was designed for namespace-aware validation from the start.</li>
        <li><b>XML syntax:</b> XSD schemas are themselves XML documents, so you can create, parse, and transform them with standard XML tools.</li>
        <li><b>Fine-grained constraints:</b> XSD supports minimum/maximum occurrences, string length limits, pattern matching, and value ranges.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="dtd-vs-xsd">
      <title>DTD vs. XSD comparison</title>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="feature" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="dtd" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="xsd" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Feature</entry>
              <entry>DTD</entry>
              <entry>XSD</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>Syntax</entry>
              <entry>Non-XML (own declaration syntax)</entry>
              <entry>XML (schemas are XML documents)</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Data types</entry>
              <entry>Only CDATA, ID, IDREF, NMTOKEN, enumerations</entry>
              <entry>44+ built-in types: string, integer, date, boolean, anyURI, etc.</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Occurrence control</entry>
              <entry><codeph>?</codeph> <codeph>*</codeph> <codeph>+</codeph> only</entry>
              <entry><codeph>minOccurs</codeph>/<codeph>maxOccurs</codeph> with any number</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Namespace support</entry>
              <entry>None</entry>
              <entry>Full namespace-aware validation</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Inheritance</entry>
              <entry>Not supported</entry>
              <entry>Complex type extension and restriction</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Pattern constraints</entry>
              <entry>Not supported</entry>
              <entry>Regular expression patterns on values</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Learning curve</entry>
              <entry>Simple — can learn in an hour</entry>
              <entry>Moderate — richer but more verbose</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="xsd-structure">
      <title>Structure of an XSD file</title>
      <p>An XSD file is an XML document with <codeph>&lt;xs:schema&gt;</codeph> as its root element:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"&gt;

  &lt;!-- Element declarations --&gt;
  &lt;xs:element name="bookstore"&gt;
    &lt;!-- type definition here --&gt;
  &lt;/xs:element&gt;

&lt;/xs:schema&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>The <codeph>xs:</codeph> prefix is bound to the W3C XML Schema namespace. Some schemas use <codeph>xsd:</codeph> instead — both are equivalent.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="linking-xsd">
      <title>How to link an XML document to its XSD</title>
      <p>Unlike DTDs (which use <codeph>&lt;!DOCTYPE&gt;</codeph>), XSD references are specified using attributes on the root element:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;bookstore xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
           xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="bookstore.xsd"&gt;
  &lt;!-- content --&gt;
&lt;/bookstore&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>If the document uses a target namespace:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;bookstore xmlns="http://example.com/bookstore"
           xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
           xsi:schemaLocation="http://example.com/bookstore bookstore.xsd"&gt;
  &lt;!-- content --&gt;
&lt;/bookstore&gt;</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="when-to-use">
      <title>When to use DTD vs. XSD</title>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Use DTD</b> when working with legacy systems, DITA 1.x content, or when you need the simplest possible validation.</li>
        <li><b>Use XSD</b> when you need data type validation, namespace support, precise occurrence constraints, or when your schema needs to be processed as XML.</li>
        <li><b>Either works</b> when you only need basic structure validation (element order and nesting).</li>
      </ul>
      <note type="tip">DITA provides both DTD and XSD grammar files. You can validate DITA content against either format — the choice depends on your toolchain's preferences.</note>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
