<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE glossgroup PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Glossary Group//EN" "glossgroup.dtd">
<!--
  Extense LLC — Expanded Glossary / Knowledge Base
  Purpose: Machine-readable terminology for the Extense chatbot.
           Each entry uses rich glossentry sub-elements so the AI can:
           - Resolve synonyms/abbreviations  (glossAlt / glossAbbreviation)
           - Show surface forms in context    (glossSurfaceForm)
           - Provide usage guidance           (glossUsage)
           - Scope applicability              (glossScopeNote)
  Chatbot: Entries are indexed by glossterm + all glossAlt values.
-->
<glossgroup id="glossary" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Glossary</title>
  <shortdesc>Comprehensive DITA and DITA-OT terminology used throughout the Extense training documentation. Each term includes definitions, abbreviations, usage guidance, and scope notes for chatbot knowledge retrieval.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-01-15"/>
      <revised modified="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Glossary</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Terminology</indexterm>
        <indexterm>DITA terms</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Knowledge base</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:reference</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="glossary"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="beginner"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT5M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="dita-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="definition"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="dita-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="none"/>
  </prolog>

  <!-- ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
       GENERAL DITA TERMS
       ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════ -->

  <glossentry id="gl-topic">
    <glossterm>Topic</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A modular, self-contained unit of content in DITA. Topics are the fundamental building blocks and come in typed flavors (concept, task, reference) to match reader intent.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA topic</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Use "topic" when referring to any standalone DITA content unit. Specify the type (concept topic, task topic) when the distinction matters.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Applicable to all DITA versions (1.0+). Topics are the core unit of structured authoring.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-concept">
    <glossterm>Concept</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A DITA topic type for explanatory, background, or "what is" content. Concepts answer questions like "What is X?" and "Why does X matter?" They use the &lt;concept&gt; root element and &lt;conbody&gt; for content.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>concept topic</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Write concepts for introductory, explanatory, or background material. Do not include step-by-step procedures in a concept — use a task topic instead.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>One of the three core DITA information types.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-task">
    <glossterm>Task</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A DITA topic type for procedural, step-by-step content. Tasks answer "How do I do X?" and use structured &lt;steps&gt; elements with &lt;cmd&gt; and optional &lt;info&gt;, &lt;stepresult&gt;, and &lt;stepxmp&gt; sub-elements.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>task topic</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Use task topics for any procedural content. Include &lt;prereq&gt; for prerequisites, &lt;context&gt; for background, and &lt;result&gt; for expected outcomes.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>One of the three core DITA information types. DITA also supports "general task" for less-structured procedures.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-reference">
    <glossterm>Reference</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A DITA topic type for lookup-oriented content such as API references, parameter tables, CLI options, or specifications. Uses the &lt;reference&gt; root element with &lt;refbody&gt; containing tables, property lists, or syntax diagrams.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>reference topic</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Use reference topics for content that users look up rather than read sequentially. Structure with tables and definition lists for scannability.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>One of the three core DITA information types.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-map">
    <glossterm>Map</glossterm>
    <glossdef>An assembly structure that organizes topics into a hierarchy for publishing. Maps define the table of contents, navigation, and relationship tables. A map does not contain content directly — it references topics.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA map</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>ditamap</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Use maps to assemble topics into deliverables. A single topic can appear in multiple maps. Use bookmaps for book-like outputs with front/back matter.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Maps use the .ditamap file extension. Bookmaps are a specialization of maps.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-bookmap">
    <glossterm>Bookmap</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A specialization of DITA map that adds book-oriented structures like parts, chapters, appendices, front matter, and back matter. Used for producing book-like deliverables (PDF, printed manuals).</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA bookmap</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Use bookmaps when your output needs book structure (chapters, parts, appendices, TOC, index). Use plain maps for simpler HTML or help outputs.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA 1.1+. Requires the bookmap DTD/schema.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-information-typing">
    <glossterm>Information Typing</glossterm>
    <glossdef>The practice of using different topic structures (concept, task, reference) to match different reader intents and optimize the user experience. This is a core DITA design principle.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>information typing</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Apply information typing by asking: "Is this content explaining something (concept), showing how to do something (task), or providing lookup data (reference)?"</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Foundational to the DITA architecture. Custom specializations can add domain-specific types.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-reuse">
    <glossterm>Reuse</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Referencing content instead of duplicating it. DITA provides three primary reuse mechanisms: conref (content reference), keyref (key reference), and conkeyref (key-based content reference). Reuse reduces translation cost, editing effort, and inconsistency.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>content reuse</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Design content for reuse by keeping topics self-contained, using conref for shared blocks, keyref for variable text, and DITAVAL for variant filtering.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Reuse is often cited as the primary economic justification for adopting DITA.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-conref">
    <glossterm>Conref</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Content reference — an attribute that pulls content from another element by matching its @id. The referenced content replaces the referencing element at processing time. This is "copy by reference" at the element level.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>content reference (conref)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>conref</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Use conref to share identical content (warnings, notes, boilerplate paragraphs) across topics. The source and target elements must be the same type.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA 1.0+. For key-based content pulling, see conkeyref.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-keyref">
    <glossterm>Keyref</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Key reference — resolves links and variable text via keys defined in the DITA map. Keys provide late binding: the same key can resolve differently in different maps or key scopes, enabling context-dependent content.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>key reference (keyref)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>keyref</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Use keyrefs for product names, version numbers, and links that may change between deliverables. Define keys in maps using &lt;keydef&gt;.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA 1.2+. Key scopes (DITA 1.3) enable multiple definitions of the same key in different contexts.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-conkeyref">
    <glossterm>Conkeyref</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Combines keys and content pulling — a key-based content reference that resolves the source element via a key definition, then pulls the content like a conref. Enables flexible multi-context reuse.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>key-based content reference (conkeyref)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>conkeyref</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Use conkeyref when the reuse source varies by context (e.g., different product editions pull from different warehouse topics).</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA 1.2+. Requires key definitions in the map.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-filtering">
    <glossterm>Filtering</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Producing content variants by including or excluding elements based on conditional attributes (audience, platform, product, otherprops) and DITAVAL rules. Also called "conditional processing" or "profiling."</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>conditional filtering</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>DITAVAL filtering</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Apply filtering attributes to elements, then use DITAVAL files to include/exclude/flag content at build time. Plan your filtering strategy before authoring.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>DITA provides four built-in filtering attributes: audience, platform, product, and otherprops.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-ditaval">
    <glossterm>DITAVAL</glossterm>
    <glossdef>An XML file that defines conditional processing rules (include, exclude, flag) applied during DITA-OT builds. DITAVAL files control which content variants appear in the output.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITAVAL file</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Create separate DITAVAL files for each product variant or audience. Reference them in build commands with --filter= or in DITA-OT project files.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>DITAVAL is processed during the filtering stage of DITA-OT preprocessing.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-specialization">
    <glossterm>Specialization</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Extending DITA's type system to represent domain-specific concepts while maintaining compatibility with standard DITA processing. Specializations inherit from base types and can add constraints or new elements.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA specialization</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Consider specialization when your domain has recurring structures that don't fit standard topic types. Always specialize from the closest existing base type.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>The "Darwin" in DITA refers to this evolutionary inheritance model.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-constraints">
    <glossterm>Constraints</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Restricting the DITA content model to enforce consistency — for example, removing optional elements or requiring certain metadata. Constraints tighten the model without adding new elements.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA constraints</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Use constraints to enforce organization-specific authoring rules (e.g., require shortdesc, prohibit nested topics).</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA 1.2+. Constraints are complementary to specialization.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-key-scope">
    <glossterm>Key Scope</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A named context within a DITA map that limits key definitions to a specific branch. Key scopes enable the same key name to resolve differently in different parts of the same map.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>key scope</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>keyscope</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Use key scopes when a single deliverable needs different values for the same key. Define with @keyscope on topicref elements.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA 1.3+.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-branch-filtering">
    <glossterm>Branch Filtering</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Applying DITAVAL filtering rules to a specific branch (subtree) of a DITA map rather than the entire map. This enables multiple filtered variants within a single build.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>branch filtering</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Use &lt;ditavalref&gt; elements on map branches to apply variant-specific filtering without separate builds.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA 1.3+. Processed during the DITA-OT branch-filter preprocessing step.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-relationship-table">
    <glossterm>Relationship Table</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A table structure in DITA maps that defines non-hierarchical relationships between topics. Each row links related concepts, tasks, and references, generating "Related links" sections in the output.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>relationship table (reltable)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>reltable</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Use relationship tables instead of inline cross-references when link relationships should be managed centrally in the map.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Relationship tables are processed during DITA-OT preprocessing to generate related-links.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-subject-scheme">
    <glossterm>Subject Scheme</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A special DITA map type that defines controlled vocabularies and taxonomies for metadata values. Subject schemes constrain attribute values to a predefined list, enabling consistent classification.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>subject scheme map</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Create subject scheme maps to define enumerated values for filtering attributes. This prevents inconsistent metadata and enables AI-readable taxonomies.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA 1.2+. Uses the subjectScheme DTD/schema.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <!-- ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
       DITA-OT DEVELOPER TERMS
       ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════ -->

  <glossentry id="gl-dita-ot">
    <glossterm>DITA Open Toolkit</glossterm>
    <glossdef>An open-source publishing engine that transforms DITA XML content into deliverable formats (HTML5, PDF, EPUB, etc.). DITA-OT provides a multi-stage processing pipeline with extension points for customization.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA Open Toolkit (DITA-OT)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>DITA-OT</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>DITA-OT is the standard publishing tool for DITA content. Most CCMS products use DITA-OT internally. Current version: 4.3.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Open-source project at github.com/dita-ot/dita-ot. Written in Java with XSLT transforms.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-transtype">
    <glossterm>Transtype</glossterm>
    <glossdef>The output format identifier used by DITA-OT to select a transformation (e.g., html5, pdf, markdown). Each transtype maps to a set of processing modules and XSLT stylesheets.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>transformation type (transtype)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Specify the transtype with -f or --format in DITA-OT commands. Custom plugins can register new transtypes.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Built-in transtypes include html5, pdf, xhtml, eclipsehelp, and markdown.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-preprocess">
    <glossterm>Preprocessing</glossterm>
    <glossdef>The first stage of DITA-OT processing that resolves references, applies filtering, normalizes content, and produces intermediate files. DITA-OT offers two pipelines: legacy "preprocess" and map-first "preprocess2."</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA-OT preprocessing (preprocess / preprocess2)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>preprocess2</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Use preprocess2 (map-first) for HTML5 output — it is faster and produces cleaner intermediate files.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>preprocess2 is available in DITA-OT 3.0+ and is the default for HTML5 in DITA-OT 4.x.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-plugin">
    <glossterm>Plugin</glossterm>
    <glossdef>An extension package for DITA-OT that can inject XSLT overrides, Ant targets, custom transtypes, processing modules, and static resources. Plugins are the standard way to customize DITA-OT output.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA-OT plugin (plug-in)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>plugin</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Create plugins for any output customization. Use the plugin.xml descriptor to declare dependencies and extension point contributions.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Plugin IDs follow reverse-domain naming (e.g., com.extense.html5.branded).</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-extension-point">
    <glossterm>Extension Point</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A named hook in the DITA-OT processing pipeline where plugins can contribute behavior — XSLT overrides, Ant targets, parameters, or resources.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA-OT extension point</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Key extension points: dita.xsl.html5 (HTML5 XSLT), dita.xsl.html5.toc (TOC), dita.conductor.target (Ant targets).</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Extension points are documented in the DITA-OT developer reference.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-intermediate-files">
    <glossterm>Intermediate Files</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Normalized, filtered XML content produced during preprocessing and used by later processing stages. Found in the DITA-OT temp directory.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA-OT intermediate files</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Inspect intermediate files in the temp/ directory to debug preprocessing issues.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Intermediate files include resolved conrefs, applied filtering, and normalized metadata.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-chunking">
    <glossterm>Chunking</glossterm>
    <glossdef>How DITA-OT decides to split or combine topics into output pages or files. Controlled by the @chunk attribute on map elements.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA chunking</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Set @chunk="to-content" to combine child topics into one file. Use @chunk="by-topic" to split nested topics.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Chunking behavior changed significantly in DITA 1.3 and DITA-OT 4.x.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-outputclass">
    <glossterm>Outputclass</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A DITA attribute that passes styling hints to the output. The value is typically rendered as a CSS class name in HTML output or a formatting attribute in PDF.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>outputclass attribute</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Use outputclass for visual customization that doesn't change content meaning. Example: &lt;codeblock outputclass="language-xml"&gt;</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available on all DITA elements. Processed by XSLT transforms during output generation.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-project-file">
    <glossterm>Project File</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A DITA-OT project file (.xml) that defines multiple deliverables, contexts, and publications in a single build configuration.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>DITA-OT project file</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Define deliverables in a project file to build multiple outputs from a single command: dita --project=myproject.xml</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Available in DITA-OT 3.4+.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <!-- ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
       EXTENSE / INDUSTRY TERMS
       ═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════ -->

  <glossentry id="gl-ccms">
    <glossterm>Component Content Management System</glossterm>
    <glossdef>A content management system designed for component-level (topic-level) content. A CCMS manages DITA topics, maps, images, and metadata as individual components with version control, workflow, and publishing integration.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>Component Content Management System (CCMS)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>CCMS</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Consider a CCMS when your team needs component-level version control, workflow management, and multi-author collaboration beyond what file-based systems like Git provide.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Extense provides CCMS implementation and integration services.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-structured-content">
    <glossterm>Structured Content</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Content authored with explicit semantic markup (XML, DITA, etc.) that separates content from presentation, enables reuse, and supports automated processing.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>structured content</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Structured content is the foundation of scalable documentation programs. DITA is the most widely adopted structured content standard for technical documentation.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Extense specializes in structured content strategy and migration from unstructured to structured formats.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-content-migration">
    <glossterm>Content Migration</glossterm>
    <glossdef>The process of converting existing documentation from unstructured formats (Word, FrameMaker, HTML, flat XML) into structured DITA XML. Includes analysis, information architecture design, conversion, and validation.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>content migration</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Plan content migration by first analyzing existing content, designing the DITA information architecture, then converting with a combination of automated tools and manual review.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>Extense offers end-to-end content migration services.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-intelligent-content">
    <glossterm>Intelligent Content</glossterm>
    <glossdef>Content that is structurally rich, semantically categorized, and machine-processable — enabling automated discovery, personalization, and AI-driven delivery.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>intelligent content</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossUsage>Transform standard DITA content into intelligent content by adding rich metadata, controlled vocabularies, content graphs, and machine-readable annotations.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>This training guide demonstrates intelligent content principles through its subject scheme, enriched prologs, and chatbot-ready metadata.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>

  <glossentry id="gl-rag">
    <glossterm>Retrieval-Augmented Generation</glossterm>
    <glossdef>An AI architecture that enhances language model responses by retrieving relevant content from a knowledge base before generating answers. RAG combines vector search over document chunks with LLM generation for grounded, accurate responses.</glossdef>
    <glossBody>
      <glossSurfaceForm>Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)</glossSurfaceForm>
      <glossAlt><glossAbbreviation>RAG</glossAbbreviation></glossAlt>
      <glossUsage>Structure DITA content for RAG by ensuring each topic has clear metadata, a good shortdesc, and proper chunking boundaries at section level.</glossUsage>
      <glossScopeNote>The Extense chatbot uses RAG over DITA-derived content chunks.</glossScopeNote>
    </glossBody>
  </glossentry>
</glossgroup>
