<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<!--
  SAMPLE: AI-Ready DITA Concept — What Is DITA?
  
  This is ONE of the topics that would be split from
  samples/before/training-overview.xml.
  
  The original mixed-content file contained:
    - Concept content (what is DITA, why use it) → this file
    - Task content (setting up environment) → installing-dita-ot.dita
    - Reference content (training modules) → a separate reference topic
  
  By splitting into typed topics, each can be independently:
    - Retrieved by AI for the right query type
    - Updated without affecting other content
    - Reused in different maps/deliverables
    - Filtered by audience and difficulty
-->
<concept id="what-is-dita" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>What Is DITA?</title>
  <shortdesc>DITA (Darwin Information Typing Architecture) is an XML-based open standard for authoring modular, reusable technical content that can be published to multiple formats from a single source.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>DITA</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Darwin Information Typing Architecture</indexterm>
        <indexterm>XML standard</indexterm>
        <indexterm>OASIS</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:introduction</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="what-is-dita"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="beginner"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT10M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="dita-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="none"/>
  </prolog>

  <conbody>
    <section id="what-is-dita-definition">
      <title>What is the Darwin Information Typing Architecture?</title>
      <p>DITA (Darwin Information Typing Architecture) is an XML-based standard for authoring, producing, and delivering technical information. Originally developed at IBM in the early 2000s, it is now an OASIS open standard used by organizations worldwide — from enterprise software companies to medical device manufacturers.</p>
      <p>DITA organizes content into <b>typed topics</b> — concepts, tasks, and references — that are assembled into deliverables using <b>maps</b>. This separation of content from presentation enables multi-channel publishing and intelligent content delivery.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="core-concepts">
      <title>What are the core concepts in DITA?</title>
      <p>DITA is built on three foundational ideas:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Topics:</b> Self-contained units of information, each covering a single subject. A topic can stand on its own or be assembled with other topics into a larger deliverable.</li>
        <li><b>Maps:</b> Organizational files that define how topics are arranged, sequenced, and related. Maps control the table of contents, navigation hierarchy, and cross-references — without modifying the topics themselves.</li>
        <li><b>Specialization:</b> A mechanism for extending the DITA vocabulary to meet domain-specific needs while preserving compatibility with the base standard. Specialized elements inherit processing behavior from their ancestors.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="topic-types">
      <title>What are the standard DITA topic types?</title>
      <p>DITA defines three base information types, each with a distinct structure optimized for its purpose:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Concept</b> (<codeph>&lt;concept&gt;</codeph>) — Explains <i>what</i> something is and <i>why</i> it matters. Contains sections with explanatory text, lists, and examples.</li>
        <li><b>Task</b> (<codeph>&lt;task&gt;</codeph>) — Describes <i>how</i> to do something. Contains prerequisites, numbered steps with commands, expected results, and post-requisites.</li>
        <li><b>Reference</b> (<codeph>&lt;reference&gt;</codeph>) — Provides <i>lookup</i> information. Contains structured tables, property lists, and syntax descriptions.</li>
      </ul>
      <p>This typing is what makes DITA content <b>intelligent</b> — a chatbot can identify whether a chunk is conceptual background, a step-by-step procedure, or a parameter reference, and deliver the right type for each user query.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="why-use-dita">
      <title>Why use DITA over unstructured formats?</title>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Write once, publish everywhere:</b> Generate HTML5, PDF, EPUB, and custom formats from a single source</li>
        <li><b>Content reuse:</b> Share content across products, audiences, and deliverables using conref and keyref</li>
        <li><b>Consistency:</b> Enforce structure and controlled vocabulary through the DITA schema</li>
        <li><b>AI-driven delivery:</b> Semantic metadata enables chatbot integration, personalized search, and intent-based routing</li>
        <li><b>Scale:</b> Manage documentation from 20 topics to 20,000 topics with the same architecture</li>
        <li><b>Translation efficiency:</b> Typed, modular content integrates smoothly with translation management systems, and reused content is translated only once</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="dita-vs-unstructured">
      <title>How does DITA compare to unstructured authoring?</title>
      <p>In unstructured authoring (Word, wiki, flat XML/HTML), the content has no enforced schema, no embedded metadata, and no separation between content and formatting. This leads to:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Copy-paste duplication instead of true reuse</li>
        <li>Inconsistent structure that AI cannot reliably parse</li>
        <li>Manual effort to produce each output format</li>
        <li>No machine-readable signal about content type or audience</li>
      </ul>
      <p>DITA addresses each of these problems through its type system, reuse mechanisms, and metadata architecture. The <b>samples/before</b> and <b>samples/after</b> files in this directory illustrate these differences concretely.</p>
    </section>
  </conbody>
</concept>
