<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="cicd-publishing-pipelines" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>CI/CD Publishing Pipelines</title>
  <shortdesc>Automate DITA builds with GitHub Actions, Jenkins, and Azure DevOps so every commit produces validated, branded deliverables — no manual builds required.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>CI/CD</indexterm><indexterm>GitHub Actions</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Jenkins</indexterm><indexterm>Azure DevOps</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Automation</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:publishing</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="build-engineer"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="docops"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="cicd-publishing-pipelines"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="advanced"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT45M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="publishing"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="how-to"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="publishing-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="dita-publishing,dita-project-files"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="why-automate-dita-builds">
      <title>Why automate DITA builds?</title>
      <p>Manual builds create bottlenecks:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Writers wait for a build engineer to produce outputs.</li>
        <li>Build parameters drift between machines — "it works on my laptop."</li>
        <li>Broken links and validation errors are discovered late.</li>
        <li>Publishing becomes a ceremony instead of a continuous process.</li>
      </ul>
      <p>CI/CD pipelines solve these problems by running DITA-OT automatically on every push,
        pull request, or release tag — validating content, building outputs, and deploying
        deliverables without human intervention.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="architecture-overview">
      <title>Pipeline architecture</title>
      <p>A typical DITA CI/CD pipeline has four stages:</p>
      <ol>
        <li><b>Trigger</b> — a Git push, PR, or scheduled event starts the pipeline.</li>
        <li><b>Build environment</b> — a Docker container with DITA-OT and plugins pre-installed
          provides a clean, repeatable environment.</li>
        <li><b>Build</b> — DITA-OT runs against the project file, producing HTML5, PDF, or other
          outputs. Validation errors fail the build.</li>
        <li><b>Deploy</b> — successful outputs are published to a web server, artifact store,
          or CDN.</li>
      </ol>
    </section>

    <section id="github-actions-example">
      <title>GitHub Actions example</title>
      <p>This workflow builds HTML5 and PDF on every push to <codeph>main</codeph>:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-yaml">name: Build DITA Documentation

on:
  push:
    branches: [main]
    paths: ['docs/**', 'maps/**', 'topics/**']
  pull_request:
    branches: [main]

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/dita-ot/dita-ot:4.3
    
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Install plugins
        run: |
          dita --install plugins/com.extense.html5.branded
          dita --install plugins/com.extense.pdf.branded

      - name: Build all deliverables
        run: dita --project=build-project.xml -v

      - name: Upload HTML5 artifact
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
        with:
          name: html5-output
          path: output/html5/

      - name: Upload PDF artifact
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
        with:
          name: pdf-output
          path: output/pdf/

      - name: Deploy to GitHub Pages
        if: github.ref == 'refs/heads/main'
        uses: peaceiris/actions-gh-pages@v3
        with:
          github_token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
          publish_dir: output/html5</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="jenkins-example">
      <title>Jenkins pipeline example</title>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-groovy">pipeline {
    agent {
        docker { image 'ghcr.io/dita-ot/dita-ot:4.3' }
    }
    triggers {
        pollSCM('H/5 * * * *')
    }
    stages {
        stage('Install Plugins') {
            steps {
                sh 'dita --install plugins/com.extense.html5.branded'
                sh 'dita --install plugins/com.extense.pdf.branded'
            }
        }
        stage('Build') {
            steps {
                sh 'dita --project=build-project.xml -v'
            }
        }
        stage('Archive') {
            steps {
                archiveArtifacts artifacts: 'output/**/*'
            }
        }
        stage('Deploy') {
            when { branch 'main' }
            steps {
                sh 'rsync -avz output/html5/ docs-server:/var/www/docs/'
            }
        }
    }
    post {
        failure {
            mail to: 'docs-team@extense.com',
                 subject: "DITA build failed: ${env.JOB_NAME}",
                 body: "Check ${env.BUILD_URL} for details."
        }
    }
}</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="azure-devops-example">
      <title>Azure DevOps pipeline</title>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-yaml">trigger:
  branches:
    include: [main]
  paths:
    include: ['docs/*', 'maps/*', 'topics/*']

pool:
  vmImage: 'ubuntu-latest'

container: ghcr.io/dita-ot/dita-ot:4.3

steps:
  - script: |
      dita --install plugins/com.extense.html5.branded
      dita --install plugins/com.extense.pdf.branded
    displayName: 'Install plugins'

  - script: dita --project=build-project.xml -v
    displayName: 'Build deliverables'

  - publish: output/html5
    artifact: html5-docs
    displayName: 'Publish HTML5 artifact'

  - publish: output/pdf
    artifact: pdf-docs
    displayName: 'Publish PDF artifact'</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="docker-images-for-ci">
      <title>Docker images for CI</title>
      <p>The official DITA-OT Docker images are the recommended base for CI:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><codeph>ghcr.io/dita-ot/dita-ot:4.3</codeph> — standard image with all built-in plugins.</li>
        <li>Build a <b>custom image</b> with your plugins pre-installed for faster CI runs:</li>
      </ul>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-dockerfile">FROM ghcr.io/dita-ot/dita-ot:4.3
COPY plugins/com.extense.html5.branded /opt/app/plugins/com.extense.html5.branded
COPY plugins/com.extense.pdf.branded   /opt/app/plugins/com.extense.pdf.branded
RUN dita --install</codeblock>
      <p>Push to your container registry and reference in CI for 30-60 second faster builds
        (no plugin install step needed).</p>
    </section>

    <section id="validation-in-ci">
      <title>Validation gates</title>
      <p>Add validation steps before the build to catch problems early:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>XML well-formedness</b> — <codeph>xmllint --noout topics/**/*.dita</codeph></li>
        <li><b>DTD/schema validation</b> — <codeph>xmllint --valid --dtdvalid</codeph> or Schematron rules</li>
        <li><b>Link checking</b> — DITA-OT reports broken topicrefs and conrefs in verbose mode</li>
        <li><b>Metadata completeness</b> — custom scripts that check every topic has required
          <codeph>&lt;data&gt;</codeph> elements (difficulty, duration, content-domain)</li>
      </ul>
      <p>Fail the build on validation errors so broken content never reaches production.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="best-practices">
      <title>Best practices</title>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Use project files</b> — not inline command arguments — so CI and local builds
          produce identical results.</li>
        <li><b>Pin the DITA-OT version</b> in your Docker image tag to avoid surprise regressions.</li>
        <li><b>Cache dependencies</b> — cache the DITA-OT home directory between builds if not
          using Docker.</li>
        <li><b>Build on PRs, deploy on merge</b> — PRs validate and produce preview artifacts;
          merges to <codeph>main</codeph> deploy to production.</li>
        <li><b>Notify on failure</b> — send Slack, email, or Teams alerts when builds break.</li>
        <li><b>Artifact retention</b> — keep build artifacts for 30-90 days for audit and rollback.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
