<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="dita-project-files" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>DITA Project Files</title>
  <shortdesc>Project files define reusable, shareable build configurations that replace long command-line arguments with declarative XML — enabling consistent, repeatable builds across teams and CI systems.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Project files</indexterm><indexterm>Build configuration</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Deliverables</indexterm><indexterm>Contexts</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:publishing</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="build-engineer"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="technical-writer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="dita-project-files"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT30M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="publishing"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="publishing-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="dita-publishing"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="why-project-files">
      <title>Why project files?</title>
      <p>Without project files, every build requires a long command line:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita -i maps/guide.ditamap -f html5 -o out/html5 \
  --args.css=brand.css --args.cssroot=css \
  --args.hdr=includes/header.xml \
  --args.indexshow=yes -v</codeblock>
      <p>This is error-prone, hard to share, and impossible to version-control meaningfully.
        Project files solve all three problems by capturing the entire build definition in XML.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="project-file-anatomy">
      <title>Project file anatomy</title>
      <p>A DITA-OT project file uses the <codeph>https://www.dita-ot.org/project</codeph> namespace
        and contains three core elements:</p>
      <dl>
        <dlentry>
          <dt><codeph>&lt;context&gt;</codeph></dt>
          <dd>Names the input map and any shared settings. Multiple deliverables can reference the
            same context, ensuring consistency.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry>
          <dt><codeph>&lt;deliverable&gt;</codeph></dt>
          <dd>Defines one output — its transtype, output directory, and parameters. A project can
            contain many deliverables.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry>
          <dt><codeph>&lt;publication&gt;</codeph></dt>
          <dd>Nested inside a deliverable — specifies the transtype and its parameter overrides.</dd>
        </dlentry>
      </dl>
    </section>

    <section id="minimal-example">
      <title>Minimal example</title>
      <p>A project file that builds both HTML5 and PDF from the same map:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;project xmlns="https://www.dita-ot.org/project"&gt;

  &lt;context name="training-guide" id="ctx-training"&gt;
    &lt;input href="extense-supermap.ditamap"/&gt;
  &lt;/context&gt;

  &lt;deliverable name="Web Site"&gt;
    &lt;context idref="ctx-training"/&gt;
    &lt;output href="./output/html5"/&gt;
    &lt;publication transtype="html5"&gt;
      &lt;param name="args.css"     value="brand.css"/&gt;
      &lt;param name="args.cssroot" value="css"/&gt;
      &lt;param name="nav-toc"      value="full"/&gt;
    &lt;/publication&gt;
  &lt;/deliverable&gt;

  &lt;deliverable name="Print Manual"&gt;
    &lt;context idref="ctx-training"/&gt;
    &lt;output href="./output/pdf"/&gt;
    &lt;publication transtype="pdf"&gt;
      &lt;param name="args.chapter.layout" value="MINITOC"/&gt;
      &lt;param name="args.bookmap-order"  value="retain"/&gt;
    &lt;/publication&gt;
  &lt;/deliverable&gt;

&lt;/project&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>Run with a single command:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --project=build-project.xml</codeblock>
      <p>DITA-OT builds every deliverable in sequence, reusing the shared context.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="advanced-patterns">
      <title>Advanced patterns</title>
      <p><b>Profile-specific deliverables</b></p>
      <p>Use DITAVAL profiles inside a context to produce filtered variants:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;context name="admin-guide" id="ctx-admin"&gt;
  &lt;input href="guide.ditamap"/&gt;
  &lt;profile&gt;
    &lt;ditaval href="filters/admin-only.ditaval"/&gt;
  &lt;/profile&gt;
&lt;/context&gt;</codeblock>

      <p><b>Multiple maps, one project</b></p>
      <p>Define separate contexts for different maps and build them all together:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;context name="user-guide" id="ctx-user"&gt;
  &lt;input href="maps/user-guide.ditamap"/&gt;
&lt;/context&gt;
&lt;context name="api-reference" id="ctx-api"&gt;
  &lt;input href="maps/api-ref.ditamap"/&gt;
&lt;/context&gt;</codeblock>

      <p><b>Including other project files</b></p>
      <p>Project files can include other project files for modular build definitions:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;project xmlns="https://www.dita-ot.org/project"&gt;
  &lt;include href="html5-deliverables.xml"/&gt;
  &lt;include href="pdf-deliverables.xml"/&gt;
&lt;/project&gt;</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="properties-files-comparison">
      <title>Properties files vs. project files</title>
      <p>DITA-OT also supports <codeph>.properties</codeph> files — simple key=value pairs loaded
        with <codeph>--propertyfile</codeph>. Choose the right tool:</p>
      <table id="comparison-table">
        <title>Properties files vs. project files</title>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="c1" colwidth="1.5*"/>
          <colspec colname="c2" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="c3" colwidth="1*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Capability</entry>
              <entry>Properties file</entry>
              <entry>Project file</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>Multiple deliverables in one file</entry>
              <entry>No</entry>
              <entry>Yes</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Shared contexts</entry>
              <entry>No</entry>
              <entry>Yes</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Include/compose other files</entry>
              <entry>No</entry>
              <entry>Yes</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>DITAVAL profiles</entry>
              <entry>Via args.filter</entry>
              <entry>Native &lt;profile&gt;</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Simplicity</entry>
              <entry>Very simple</entry>
              <entry>More verbose</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
      <p>Use properties files for quick, single-transtype builds. Use project files when you
        manage multiple deliverables, filtered variants, or CI pipelines.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="best-practices">
      <title>Best practices</title>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Version-control your project files</b> alongside your DITA source — they are part
          of your publication definition.</li>
        <li><b>Name deliverables clearly</b> — <codeph>name="Admin PDF (v3.2)"</codeph> makes
          build logs easy to scan.</li>
        <li><b>Use relative paths</b> for input maps and output directories so the project works
          across machines.</li>
        <li><b>Keep one project file per product</b> — include shared definitions from a common
          file to avoid duplication.</li>
        <li><b>Test locally before CI</b> — run <codeph>dita --project=build.xml</codeph> on your
          machine to catch configuration errors early.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
