<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="multi-channel-output-formats" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Multi-Channel Output Formats</title>
  <shortdesc>DITA-OT transforms structured source into HTML5, PDF, EPUB, Markdown, and custom formats — each from the same map with no content duplication.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Output formats</indexterm><indexterm>HTML5</indexterm><indexterm>PDF</indexterm>
        <indexterm>EPUB</indexterm><indexterm>Multi-channel</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:publishing</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="build-engineer"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="technical-writer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="multi-channel-output-formats"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT35M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="publishing"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="publishing-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="dita-publishing"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="one-source-many-outputs">
      <title>One source, many outputs</title>
      <p>The core value of DITA publishing is <b>single-source, multi-channel delivery</b>.
        You author once in structured XML, then transform the same content into every format
        your audience needs — without maintaining parallel copies.</p>
      <p>DITA-OT ships with built-in transforms (called <term>transtypes</term>) and supports
        additional formats through installable plugins.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="built-in-transtypes">
      <title>Built-in transtypes</title>
      <p>DITA-OT includes these transforms out of the box:</p>
      <table id="transtype-table">
        <title>Built-in DITA-OT transtypes</title>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="c1" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="c2" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="c3" colwidth="1.5*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Transtype</entry>
              <entry>Description</entry>
              <entry>Use case</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>html5</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Modern HTML5 with responsive navigation, search index, and CSS hooks</entry>
              <entry>Documentation portals, internal wikis</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>pdf</codeph></entry>
              <entry>XSL-FO pipeline rendered via Apache FOP — produces print-ready PDFs</entry>
              <entry>Regulatory filings, printed manuals</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>xhtml</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Legacy XHTML 1.0 output for older systems</entry>
              <entry>Embedding in legacy CMS platforms</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>markdown</codeph> / <codeph>markdown_github</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Exports DITA content back to Markdown for developer workflows</entry>
              <entry>GitHub READMEs, developer docs</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>tocjs</codeph></entry>
              <entry>HTML with JavaScript-driven table of contents</entry>
              <entry>Standalone doc bundles</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="plugin-based-formats">
      <title>Plugin-based formats</title>
      <p>The DITA-OT plugin registry and community provide additional transtypes:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>EPUB</b> — <codeph>org.dita.epub</codeph> generates EPUB 3 eBooks for e-readers
          and mobile reading apps.</li>
        <li><b>Normalized DITA</b> — <codeph>org.dita.normalize</codeph> resolves all conrefs
          and keyrefs into flat, standalone topics for CMS import.</li>
        <li><b>JSON / YAML</b> — Community plugins can export topic metadata and content as
          structured data for API documentation or chatbot ingestion.</li>
        <li><b>Custom HTML5</b> — Branded plugins (like <codeph>com.extense.html5.branded</codeph>)
          extend the built-in HTML5 transform with custom CSS, headers, footers, and scripts.</li>
        <li><b>Custom PDF</b> — Branded plugins (like <codeph>com.extense.pdf.branded</codeph>)
          override FO templates for corporate fonts, logos, and page layouts.</li>
      </ul>
      <p>Install a plugin with:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --install &lt;plugin-zip-or-url&gt;</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="choosing-the-right-format">
      <title>Choosing the right format</title>
      <p>Match the output format to the delivery channel:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Web portal</b> → HTML5 (with branded plugin for navigation and styling)</li>
        <li><b>Printed manual or regulatory submission</b> → PDF</li>
        <li><b>E-reader / offline mobile</b> → EPUB</li>
        <li><b>Developer repository</b> → Markdown (GitHub-flavored)</li>
        <li><b>AI / chatbot pipeline</b> → JSON export or normalized DITA for RAG ingestion</li>
        <li><b>CMS migration</b> → Normalized DITA with all references resolved</li>
      </ul>
      <p>You can — and should — build multiple formats from the same map in a single CI pipeline.
        This is the <b>write-once-publish-everywhere</b> promise of DITA.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="format-specific-considerations">
      <title>Format-specific considerations</title>
      <p><b>HTML5</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>Use <codeph>args.cssroot</codeph> and <codeph>args.css</codeph> to inject custom stylesheets.</li>
        <li>The <codeph>args.hdr</codeph> and <codeph>args.ftr</codeph> parameters add header/footer includes.</li>
        <li>Search indexes are generated automatically — enable with <codeph>args.indexshow=yes</codeph>.</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>PDF</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>PDF generation uses Apache FOP by default. For higher fidelity, consider Antenna House or RenderX XEP.</li>
        <li>Use <codeph>args.chapter.layout=MINITOC</codeph> to add mini table-of-contents at chapter starts.</li>
        <li>Custom fonts require FOP configuration changes (see the XSLT customization part of this guide).</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>EPUB</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>Cover images: set via <codeph>args.epub.coverimage</codeph>.</li>
        <li>EPUB 3 supports embedded video and audio — DITA <codeph>&lt;object&gt;</codeph> elements map automatically.</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Markdown</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>Markdown export is lossy — DITA metadata, conrefs, and keys do not survive the round-trip.</li>
        <li>Use markdown export for developer consumption, not as an authoring format.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="building-multiple-formats">
      <title>Building multiple formats from one map</title>
      <p>Use a DITA-OT project file (<codeph>.xml</codeph>) to define multiple deliverables in a single build:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;project xmlns="https://www.dita-ot.org/project"&gt;
  &lt;context name="training-guide"&gt;
    &lt;input href="extense-supermap.ditamap"/&gt;
  &lt;/context&gt;
  &lt;deliverable name="html5"&gt;
    &lt;context idref="training-guide"/&gt;
    &lt;output href="./output/html5"/&gt;
    &lt;publication transtype="html5"&gt;
      &lt;param name="args.css" value="brand.css"/&gt;
    &lt;/publication&gt;
  &lt;/deliverable&gt;
  &lt;deliverable name="pdf"&gt;
    &lt;context idref="training-guide"/&gt;
    &lt;output href="./output/pdf"/&gt;
    &lt;publication transtype="pdf"&gt;
      &lt;param name="args.chapter.layout" value="MINITOC"/&gt;
    &lt;/publication&gt;
  &lt;/deliverable&gt;
&lt;/project&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>Run with: <codeph>dita --project=build.xml</codeph></p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
