<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="troubleshooting-dita-builds" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Troubleshooting DITA Builds</title>
  <shortdesc>Diagnose and fix common DITA-OT build failures — broken links, missing content, PDF rendering issues, memory errors, and plugin conflicts — using verbose logging, FOP diagnostics, and systematic debugging.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Troubleshooting</indexterm><indexterm>Build errors</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Debugging</indexterm><indexterm>FOP</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Verbose logging</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:publishing</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="build-engineer"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="technical-writer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="troubleshooting-dita-builds"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT40M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="publishing"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="troubleshoot"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="publishing-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="dita-publishing"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="debugging-mindset">
      <title>The debugging mindset</title>
      <p>DITA-OT builds fail for predictable reasons. The key is reading the right logs,
        understanding which pipeline stage failed, and applying targeted fixes. This topic
        covers the most common failures and their solutions.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="verbose-logging">
      <title>Verbose and debug logging</title>
      <p>Always start diagnosis with verbose output:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Verbose mode — shows warnings and processing steps
dita -i map.ditamap -f html5 -o out/ -v

# Debug mode — maximum detail (very verbose)
dita -i map.ditamap -f html5 -o out/ -d

# Save log to file for analysis
dita -i map.ditamap -f html5 -o out/ -v 2>&amp;1 | tee build.log</codeblock>
      <p>Key log prefixes to watch for:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><codeph>[WARN]</codeph> — potential problems that do not stop the build but may cause
          missing content or broken links in the output.</li>
        <li><codeph>[ERROR]</codeph> — problems that prevent successful output generation.</li>
        <li><codeph>[FATAL]</codeph> — the build cannot continue at all.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="broken-links">
      <title>Broken links and missing references</title>
      <p><b>Symptom:</b> Warnings like <codeph>DOTJ013W</codeph> or <codeph>DOTX036W</codeph>
        in the log — "file not found" or "target topic not found."</p>
      <p><b>Common causes:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Wrong href path</b> — relative paths are resolved from the map's directory, not the
          topic's directory. Double-check your directory structure.</li>
        <li><b>Typo in filename or ID</b> — DITA file references are case-sensitive on Linux/macOS.</li>
        <li><b>Moved or renamed files</b> — update all maps and conrefs that reference the file.</li>
        <li><b>Missing keydef</b> — a <codeph>keyref</codeph> points to a key not defined in the
          current map's key space.</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Fix checklist:</b></p>
      <ol>
        <li>Grep for the broken reference: <codeph>grep -r "filename.dita" maps/ submaps/</codeph></li>
        <li>Verify the file exists at the expected relative path.</li>
        <li>Check key definitions in the root map and submaps.</li>
        <li>Re-run with <codeph>-v</codeph> to confirm the warning is resolved.</li>
      </ol>
    </section>

    <section id="missing-content">
      <title>Missing content in output</title>
      <p><b>Symptom:</b> Topics or sections that exist in your source do not appear in the output.</p>
      <p><b>Common causes:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>DITAVAL filtering</b> — content is being excluded by a profiling rule. Check your
          <codeph>--args.filter</codeph> settings and profiling attributes.</li>
        <li><b>Topic not referenced in map</b> — a topic file exists but is not included in any
          <codeph>&lt;topicref&gt;</codeph>.</li>
        <li><b>Broken conref</b> — a conref target does not resolve, so the content silently
          disappears.</li>
        <li><b>processing-role="resource-only"</b> — the topicref is marked as resource-only
          (for key definitions) and is intentionally excluded from output.</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Diagnosis:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Check which topics were processed
dita -i map.ditamap -f html5 -o out/ -v 2>&amp;1 | grep "Processing"

# Check filtering rules
grep -r "action=\"exclude\"" filters/</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="pdf-specific-issues">
      <title>PDF-specific issues</title>
      <p><b>Blank pages</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>FOP inserts blank pages to maintain recto/verso page numbering in double-sided layouts.
          This is intentional for print output.</li>
        <li>To suppress: set <codeph>force-page-count="auto"</codeph> in your custom FO
          templates (requires plugin customization).</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Missing or wrong fonts</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>FOP only uses fonts it knows about. Register custom fonts in <codeph>fop.xconf</codeph>:</li>
      </ul>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;renderer mime="application/pdf"&gt;
  &lt;fonts&gt;
    &lt;font metrics-url="fonts/OpenSans-Regular.xml"
          embed-url="fonts/OpenSans-Regular.ttf"
          kerning="yes"&gt;
      &lt;font-triplet name="Open Sans" style="normal" weight="normal"/&gt;
    &lt;/font&gt;
  &lt;/fonts&gt;
&lt;/renderer&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>Apply with: <codeph>--args.fo.userconfig=fop.xconf</codeph></p>

      <p><b>Table layout overflow</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>Wide tables overflow the page. Use <codeph>colspec</codeph> with proportional widths
          (<codeph>colwidth="1*"</codeph>) instead of fixed widths.</li>
        <li>Reduce font size in table cells via custom FO attribute sets.</li>
      </ul>

      <p><b>Image resolution</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>FOP renders images at their intrinsic resolution. For print, use images at 300 DPI
          minimum.</li>
        <li>Set explicit width/height in <codeph>&lt;image&gt;</codeph> elements to control sizing.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="memory-errors">
      <title>Memory and performance issues</title>
      <p><b>Symptom:</b> <codeph>java.lang.OutOfMemoryError: Java heap space</codeph></p>
      <p><b>Fix:</b> Increase the JVM heap size before running DITA-OT:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Set maximum heap to 4 GB
export ANT_OPTS="-Xmx4096m"
dita -i large-map.ditamap -f pdf -o out/</codeblock>
      <p>For very large publications (500+ topics), consider:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Splitting into smaller maps built independently.</li>
        <li>Using map-first preprocessing (<codeph>preprocess2</codeph>) which is more memory-efficient.</li>
        <li>Running builds in Docker containers with controlled memory limits.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="plugin-conflicts">
      <title>Plugin conflicts</title>
      <p><b>Symptom:</b> Build fails after installing a new plugin, or output looks wrong.</p>
      <p><b>Diagnosis:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># List installed plugins
dita --plugins

# Check for duplicate template overrides
grep -r "xsl:template" plugins/*/xsl/ | grep "match="</codeblock>
      <p><b>Common issues:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Conflicting XSLT imports</b> — two plugins override the same template. Check
          <codeph>plugin.xml</codeph> for <codeph>dita.xsl.xhtml</codeph> extension points.</li>
        <li><b>Missing dependencies</b> — a plugin requires another plugin that is not installed.
          Check <codeph>&lt;require&gt;</codeph> elements in <codeph>plugin.xml</codeph>.</li>
        <li><b>Version mismatch</b> — plugin was built for an older DITA-OT version. Check the
          <codeph>&lt;require&gt;</codeph> for <codeph>org.dita.base</codeph> version constraints.</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Nuclear option:</b> Reinstall DITA-OT from scratch and add plugins one at a time
        to isolate the conflict.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="common-error-codes">
      <title>Common error codes quick reference</title>
      <table id="error-codes-table">
        <title>Frequently seen DITA-OT error codes</title>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="c1" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="c2" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="c3" colwidth="1.5*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Code</entry>
              <entry>Meaning</entry>
              <entry>Action</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>DOTX036W</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Target topic not available</entry>
              <entry>Fix href path or add missing file</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>DOTJ013W</codeph></entry>
              <entry>File not found</entry>
              <entry>Check relative path from map directory</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>DOTJ031E</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Conref target not found</entry>
              <entry>Verify conref path and target ID</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>DOTX050I</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Duplicate key definition</entry>
              <entry>Review key scopes in sub-maps</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>DOTA069W</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Key not resolved</entry>
              <entry>Add keydef to root map or check scope</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>PDFX004F</codeph></entry>
              <entry>FOP formatting error</entry>
              <entry>Check table widths, image paths, fonts</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="troubleshooting-workflow">
      <title>Systematic troubleshooting workflow</title>
      <ol>
        <li><b>Read the log</b> — run with <codeph>-v</codeph> and search for <codeph>[ERROR]</codeph>
          and <codeph>[WARN]</codeph>.</li>
        <li><b>Identify the stage</b> — is the error in preprocessing (references), filtering,
          transformation, or postprocessing?</li>
        <li><b>Isolate</b> — build a minimal map with just the problem topic to rule out
          map-level issues.</li>
        <li><b>Validate XML</b> — run <codeph>xmllint --noout topic.dita</codeph> to check
          well-formedness.</li>
        <li><b>Check temp files</b> — examine <codeph>out/temp/</codeph> for intermediate files
          that show how DITA-OT processed your content.</li>
        <li><b>Compare</b> — diff a working topic against the broken one to spot differences.</li>
        <li><b>Fix and re-run</b> — make one change at a time and rebuild to confirm each fix.</li>
      </ol>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
