<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="dtd-element-declarations" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>DTD Element Declarations</title>
  <shortdesc>Element declarations in a DTD define which elements can appear in a document and specify their allowed content — child elements, text, or a combination of both.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-04-05"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>DTD elements</indexterm>
        <indexterm>ELEMENT declaration</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Content model</indexterm>
        <indexterm>PCDATA</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:xml-schema</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="xml-training" appname="chatbot" id="dtd-element-declarations"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="beginner"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT20M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="xml-schema"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="what-is-dtd"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="syntax">
      <title>Element declaration syntax</title>
      <p>The basic syntax for declaring an element is:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!ELEMENT element-name (content-model)&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>The content model specifies what the element can contain. There are several types:</p>
    </section>

    <section id="text-only">
      <title>Text-only elements (#PCDATA)</title>
      <p>An element that contains only text (no child elements) uses <codeph>#PCDATA</codeph> (Parsed Character Data):</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!ELEMENT title (#PCDATA)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT author (#PCDATA)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT price (#PCDATA)&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>Usage in an XML document:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;title&gt;Learning XML&lt;/title&gt;
&lt;price&gt;29.95&lt;/price&gt;</codeblock>
      <note type="important"><codeph>#PCDATA</codeph> stands for "Parsed Character Data" — meaning the parser will process entity references like <codeph>&amp;amp;</codeph> inside the text. It does <b>not</b> mean the element can only contain plain text strings.</note>
    </section>

    <section id="child-elements">
      <title>Elements with child elements (sequences)</title>
      <p>An element that must contain specific child elements in a specific order uses a comma-separated list:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!ELEMENT book (title, author, year, price)&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>This means a <codeph>&lt;book&gt;</codeph> must contain exactly one <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph>, followed by one <codeph>&lt;author&gt;</codeph>, then one <codeph>&lt;year&gt;</codeph>, then one <codeph>&lt;price&gt;</codeph> — in that exact order.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="occurrence-indicators">
      <title>Occurrence indicators: How many times?</title>
      <p>By default, a child element must appear exactly once. You can change this with occurrence indicators:</p>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="indicator" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="meaning" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="example" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Indicator</entry>
              <entry>Meaning</entry>
              <entry>Example</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>(none)</entry>
              <entry>Exactly one (required)</entry>
              <entry><codeph>title</codeph> — one title required</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>?</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Zero or one (optional)</entry>
              <entry><codeph>subtitle?</codeph> — subtitle is optional</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>*</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Zero or more</entry>
              <entry><codeph>author*</codeph> — any number of authors (including none)</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>+</codeph></entry>
              <entry>One or more (at least one required)</entry>
              <entry><codeph>chapter+</codeph> — at least one chapter required</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!-- A book has one title, optional subtitle, one or more authors, and one price --&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT book (title, subtitle?, author+, price)&gt;</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="choices">
      <title>Choice groups (alternatives)</title>
      <p>Use the pipe character (<codeph>|</codeph>) to indicate that one of several elements can appear:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!-- A payment is EITHER a credit-card OR a bank-transfer OR cash --&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT payment (credit-card | bank-transfer | cash)&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>You can combine sequences and choices with parentheses:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!-- A product has a name, then either a description or a summary, then a price --&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT product (name, (description | summary), price)&gt;</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="mixed-content">
      <title>Mixed content</title>
      <p>An element with mixed content can contain both text and child elements. The syntax uses <codeph>#PCDATA</codeph> with choices and the <codeph>*</codeph> indicator:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!ELEMENT paragraph (#PCDATA | bold | italic | link)*&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>This allows content like:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;paragraph&gt;Click &lt;bold&gt;Save&lt;/bold&gt; to store your &lt;italic&gt;document&lt;/italic&gt;.&lt;/paragraph&gt;</codeblock>
      <note type="important">In mixed content declarations, <codeph>#PCDATA</codeph> must be listed <b>first</b>, and the group must use choice (<codeph>|</codeph>) with <codeph>*</codeph>. You cannot use sequences with mixed content.</note>
    </section>

    <section id="empty-and-any">
      <title>EMPTY and ANY content</title>
      <p>Two special content models:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!-- Element must have no content --&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT linebreak EMPTY&gt;

&lt;!-- Element can contain anything (text, elements, or both) --&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT container ANY&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><codeph>EMPTY</codeph> is common for elements like line breaks or images that carry information through attributes only. <codeph>ANY</codeph> is rarely used in production because it provides no validation.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="complete-example">
      <title>Complete example: A bookstore DTD</title>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!ELEMENT bookstore (book+)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT book (title, author+, year, price, description?)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT title (#PCDATA)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT author (#PCDATA)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT year (#PCDATA)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT price (#PCDATA)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT description (#PCDATA | bold | italic)*&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT bold (#PCDATA)&gt;
&lt;!ELEMENT italic (#PCDATA)&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>This DTD says:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>A <codeph>&lt;bookstore&gt;</codeph> contains one or more <codeph>&lt;book&gt;</codeph> elements</li>
        <li>A <codeph>&lt;book&gt;</codeph> has a required title, one or more authors, a year, a price, and an optional description</li>
        <li>The <codeph>&lt;description&gt;</codeph> can contain mixed content with bold and italic markup</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
