<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="creating-a-project">
  <title>Creating a Project</title>
  <shortdesc>Initialize a new AcmeDoc project with a map, sample topics, and build configuration.</shortdesc>
  <taskbody>

    <context>
      <p>A <keyword keyref="product-name"/> project consists of a DITA map, topic files, and build properties. This task walks you through creating one from scratch.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>
      <step>
        <cmd>Create the project directory structure.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">mkdir -p myproject/{maps,topics,build,out}
cd myproject</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>
      <step>
        <cmd>Create a root map file.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create <codeph>maps/guide.ditamap</codeph> with your topic references:</p>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE map PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Map//EN" "map.dtd"&gt;
&lt;map id="guide"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;My Guide&lt;/title&gt;
  &lt;topicref href="../topics/overview.dita"/&gt;
&lt;/map&gt;</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>
      <step>
        <cmd>Create your first topic.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create <codeph>topics/overview.dita</codeph>:</p>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd"&gt;
&lt;concept id="overview"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;Overview&lt;/title&gt;
  &lt;shortdesc&gt;An overview of the project.&lt;/shortdesc&gt;
  &lt;conbody&gt;
    &lt;p&gt;Add your content here.&lt;/p&gt;
  &lt;/conbody&gt;
&lt;/concept&gt;</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>
      <step>
        <cmd>Build HTML5 output.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita -i maps/guide.ditamap -f html5 -o out/html5</codeblock>
          <note type="note">If you have a custom plug-in installed, your overrides will apply automatically.</note>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps>

    <result>
      <p>Your project is created. Open <codeph>out/html5/index.html</codeph> in a browser to view the output.</p>
    </result>

  </taskbody>
</task>
