<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="ai-readiness-maturity-model" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>AI-Readiness Maturity Model for Content</title>
  <shortdesc>A five-level maturity model for evaluating how ready your content is for AI-driven delivery — from Level 1 (unstructured files) to Level 5 (fully intelligent, self-optimizing content).</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-02-10"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Maturity model</indexterm>
        <indexterm>AI readiness</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Content maturity</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Assessment</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:intelligent-content</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="ai-readiness-maturity-model"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT15M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="dita-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="what-is-intelligent-content"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="maturity-levels">
      <title>The five levels of content AI-readiness</title>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="4">
          <colspec colname="level" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="name" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="desc" colwidth="3*"/>
          <colspec colname="ai" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Level</entry>
              <entry>Name</entry>
              <entry>Content characteristics</entry>
              <entry>AI capability</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>1</entry>
              <entry>Unstructured</entry>
              <entry>Flat files (Word, wiki pages, flat XML/HTML). No metadata. No typing. Visual formatting embedded in content.</entry>
              <entry>Keyword search only. No filtering, no intent routing, no personalization.</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>2</entry>
              <entry>Structured</entry>
              <entry>Content organized into typed units (concepts, tasks, references). Semantic markup replaces visual formatting. Basic metadata present.</entry>
              <entry>Vector search with section-aware chunking. Type-based answer formatting. Basic filtering by category.</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>3</entry>
              <entry>Enriched</entry>
              <entry>Full metadata on every topic: audience, difficulty, domain, intent, priority. Controlled vocabulary via taxonomy. Section IDs enabling deep linking.</entry>
              <entry>Metadata-filtered retrieval. Intent-based answer routing. Audience-matched results. Priority-weighted ranking.</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>4</entry>
              <entry>Connected</entry>
              <entry>Content linked into learning paths, prerequisite chains, and relationship tables. Glossary with synonym resolution. Schema.org structured data output.</entry>
              <entry>Follow-up suggestions. "Read this first" guidance. Term resolution. Web-standard structured data for search engines.</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>5</entry>
              <entry>Intelligent</entry>
              <entry>Analytics-instrumented output. Feedback loops. Content automatically improves based on usage data, retrieval performance, and user ratings.</entry>
              <entry>Self-optimizing content delivery. Data-driven gap analysis. Automated quality scoring. Continuous improvement pipeline.</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="scoring-dimensions">
      <title>How to score your content's AI-readiness</title>
      <p>Evaluate your content across ten dimensions, scoring each from 1 (absent) to 10 (excellent):</p>
      <ol>
        <li><b>Structural intelligence:</b> Are topics properly typed (concept, task, reference)? Do sections have IDs and titles? Is there a clear information hierarchy?</li>
        <li><b>Metadata completeness:</b> Does every topic have audience, difficulty, domain, intent, priority, dates, and keywords?</li>
        <li><b>AI/RAG pipeline readiness:</b> Is there an ingestion pipeline? Chunking strategy? Vector database? Retrieval configuration? (<i>RAG — Retrieval Augmented Generation — is a pattern where an AI retrieves relevant content chunks from a database before generating an answer, rather than relying solely on its training data.</i>)</li>
        <li><b>Taxonomy and controlled vocabulary:</b> Is there a formal subject scheme (a DITA file that defines the allowed metadata values — like a picklist for categories) or other classification system? Are values consistent across topics?</li>
        <li><b>Glossary and term resolution:</b> Is there a machine-readable glossary with synonyms, abbreviations, and usage guidance?</li>
        <li><b>Schema.org / structured data:</b> Do published outputs include JSON-LD (a lightweight format for embedding machine-readable metadata in HTML pages) or other structured data markup that search engines can consume?</li>
        <li><b>Retrieval optimization:</b> Are shortdescs written as chunk summaries? Section titles as questions? Content front-loaded?</li>
        <li><b>Reuse architecture:</b> Is content single-sourced via conref/keyref? Are there shared libraries?</li>
        <li><b>Consistency across corpus:</b> Is the metadata standard applied uniformly? Are there gaps or two-tier quality?</li>
        <li><b>Scalability and governance:</b> Can the content model scale to 10x the current corpus? Are there authoring guidelines and validation?</li>
      </ol>
      <p>A score below 5/10 on any dimension indicates a critical gap that will degrade AI-driven delivery. The target for production chatbot deployment is 8+/10 on all dimensions.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="extense-case-study">
      <title>Case study: The Extense training guide assessment</title>
      <p>When we assessed the Extense DITA Training Guide against this model, the initial scoring was:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Overall: 7.2/10</b> — strong foundation, but a critical gap in metadata consistency</li>
        <li><b>Structural intelligence: 9/10</b> — proper information typing throughout</li>
        <li><b>Metadata completeness: 6/10</b> — 15 top-level topics had full metadata, but 34 sub-topics had bare-minimum metadata (author + indexterms only)</li>
        <li><b>Consistency: 5/10</b> — the two-tier metadata gap meant 69% of topics were invisible to metadata-filtered retrieval</li>
      </ul>
      <p>After enriching all 49 topics with full AI-ready prolog metadata:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Overall: 9.2/10</b> — production-ready for chatbot deployment</li>
        <li><b>Metadata completeness: 9/10</b> — 100% of topics carry full AI-ready metadata</li>
        <li><b>Consistency: 9/10</b> — uniform standard across all topic tiers</li>
      </ul>
      <p>This guide documents every step of that transformation.</p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
