<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="retrieval-and-generation" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Retrieval, Reranking, and Answer Generation</title>
  <shortdesc>How the chatbot searches the vector store with metadata filters, reranks results with a cross-encoder, and generates cited answers grounded entirely in the training documentation.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-02-10"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Retrieval</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Reranking</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Cross-encoder</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Answer generation</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Citation</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:intelligent-content</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="developer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="retrieval-and-generation"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="advanced"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT15M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="architecture"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="dita-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="chunking-and-embedding"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="retrieval-process">
      <title>How does metadata-filtered retrieval work?</title>
      <p>When a user asks a question, the chatbot performs a <b>two-phase retrieval</b>:</p>
      <ol>
        <li><b>Intent classification:</b> The query is classified as a question type (explain, how-to, troubleshoot, reference, definition)</li>
        <li><b>Filtered vector search:</b> The query embedding is compared against the vector store, but only chunks matching the metadata filters are considered</li>
      </ol>
      <p>Example query flow:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-text">User query: "How do I set up a CI/CD pipeline for DITA builds?"

Intent detected: how-to
Metadata filters applied:
  content-intent IN (how-to, tutorial)
  content-domain IN (devops, publishing)

Vector search: top_k=8, score_threshold=0.72

Results before filtering: 3,200 chunks
Results after filtering:    140 chunks
Results after vector search:  8 chunks</codeblock>
      <p>Without metadata filters, the search would scan all 3,200 chunks and might return concept explanations instead of task instructions. The metadata filter narrows the search space by 96%, dramatically improving both speed and relevance.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="priority-boosting">
      <title>How does chatbot-priority boosting affect results?</title>
      <p>The <codeph>chatbot-priority</codeph> metadata field applies a score multiplier to retrieval results:</p>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="priority" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="boost" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="effect" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Priority value</entry>
              <entry>Score multiplier</entry>
              <entry>Effect on ranking</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>high</entry>
              <entry>1.3×</entry>
              <entry>Core content surfaces first; user-facing tasks and key concepts get top placement</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>medium</entry>
              <entry>1.0×</entry>
              <entry>Standard ranking; supporting content appears in natural order</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>low</entry>
              <entry>0.8×</entry>
              <entry>Peripheral content (historical notes, edge cases) is deprioritized</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
      <p>This means a chunk with a vector similarity score of 0.85 and high priority gets an effective score of 1.105, while a chunk at 0.88 with low priority gets 0.704. The high-priority chunk ranks first despite a lower raw similarity score.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="cross-encoder-reranking">
      <title>Why is cross-encoder reranking necessary?</title>
      <p>Vector similarity search is fast but imprecise — it finds chunks that are <i>topically similar</i> but may not actually <i>answer the question</i>. A cross-encoder reranker is a second model that reads the query and each candidate chunk together and scores how well the chunk answers the query.</p>
      <p>The pipeline:</p>
      <ol>
        <li>Vector search retrieves 8 candidates (top_k = 8)</li>
        <li>Cross-encoder scores each (query, chunk) pair on a 0-1 relevance scale</li>
        <li>Chunks are re-sorted by cross-encoder score</li>
        <li>Only chunks above the reranker threshold are passed to the LLM</li>
      </ol>
      <p>In testing, cross-encoder reranking improved answer accuracy by 18–24% compared to vector search alone, because it catches cases where surface-level word overlap misleads the embedding model.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="answer-generation">
      <title>How does the LLM generate grounded answers?</title>
      <p>The answer generation prompt is constructed from the top-ranked chunks:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-text">SYSTEM PROMPT:
You are a DITA training assistant. Answer the user's
question using ONLY the provided context chunks. If the
context does not contain the answer, say so. Cite your
sources using [topic_id § section_id] format.

CONTEXT CHUNKS:
[1] topic_id: github-actions-cicd
    section: pipeline-setup
    type: task
    "To set up a CI/CD pipeline for DITA builds..."

[2] topic_id: docker-basics
    section: container-builds
    type: task
    "Docker containers enable reproducible DITA builds..."

[3] topic_id: dita-publishing
    section: automated-builds
    type: concept
    "Automated publishing pipelines ensure..."

USER QUESTION:
"How do I set up a CI/CD pipeline for DITA builds?"</codeblock>
      <p>The generated answer cites specific sections, allowing users to verify the information:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-text">GENERATED ANSWER:
To set up a CI/CD pipeline for DITA builds, follow these
steps:

1. Create a GitHub Actions workflow that triggers on pushes
   to your main branch [github-actions-cicd § pipeline-setup]

2. Use a Docker container with DITA-OT pre-installed to
   ensure reproducible builds [docker-basics § container-builds]

3. Configure the pipeline to run `dita -i your.ditamap
   -f html5 -o output/` as the build step
   [github-actions-cicd § pipeline-setup]

See also: Automated Publishing (dita-publishing § automated-builds)</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="glossary-enrichment">
      <title>How does the glossary enhance answers?</title>
      <p>When a query or answer contains terms defined in the DITA glossary, the chatbot can:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Inline definitions:</b> Automatically expand abbreviations the first time they appear ("DITA-OT (DITA Open Toolkit)")</li>
        <li><b>Link to glossary entries:</b> Add a "Key terms" section at the bottom of the answer</li>
        <li><b>Resolve synonyms:</b> Map user terminology to the canonical terms in the controlled vocabulary, improving retrieval matching</li>
        <li><b>Scope warnings:</b> Flag when a term applies to a specific version ("Note: keyref requires DITA 1.2+")</li>
      </ul>
      <p>This is only possible because DITA glossary entries are structured data with <codeph>glossterm</codeph>, <codeph>glossdef</codeph>, <codeph>glossSurfaceForm</codeph>, and <codeph>glossAlt</codeph> — not just a flat list of term-definition pairs.</p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
