<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="dita-topic-types" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>DITA Topic Types: Concept, Task, and Reference</title>
  <shortdesc>DITA enforces information typing through three core topic types — concept for explanations, task for procedures, and reference for lookup data — each with a specific XML structure.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-04-05"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>DITA topic types</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Concept topic</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Task topic</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Reference topic</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Information typing</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:dita-fundamentals</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="xml-training" appname="chatbot" id="dita-topic-types"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="beginner"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT20M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="dita-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="dita-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="what-is-dita"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="why-types">
      <title>Why does DITA have different topic types?</title>
      <p>Every piece of technical content serves one of three purposes: explaining something, teaching how to do something, or providing data for lookup. DITA makes this purpose explicit by giving each type its own XML structure with specific allowed elements.</p>
      <p>This typing matters because:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Authors</b> get a structural template that guides their writing</li>
        <li><b>Readers</b> get consistent, predictable content</li>
        <li><b>Tools</b> can validate, transform, and filter based on type</li>
        <li><b>AI systems</b> can format responses differently for concepts vs. tasks vs. references</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="concept-topics">
      <title>Concept topics: "What is...?" and "Why?"</title>
      <p>A concept topic explains an idea, provides background, or describes architecture. It uses prose organized into sections.</p>
      <p><b>Structure:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd"&gt;
&lt;concept id="what-is-version-control"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;What Is Version Control?&lt;/title&gt;
  &lt;shortdesc&gt;Version control tracks changes to files over
    time, enabling collaboration and rollback.&lt;/shortdesc&gt;
  &lt;conbody&gt;
    &lt;section id="definition"&gt;
      &lt;title&gt;Definition&lt;/title&gt;
      &lt;p&gt;Version control is a system that records changes
        to files over time.&lt;/p&gt;
    &lt;/section&gt;
    &lt;section id="benefits"&gt;
      &lt;title&gt;Key Benefits&lt;/title&gt;
      &lt;ul&gt;
        &lt;li&gt;Track who changed what and when&lt;/li&gt;
        &lt;li&gt;Revert to previous versions&lt;/li&gt;
        &lt;li&gt;Branch and merge changes&lt;/li&gt;
      &lt;/ul&gt;
    &lt;/section&gt;
  &lt;/conbody&gt;
&lt;/concept&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>Key elements:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><codeph>&lt;concept&gt;</codeph> — root element with required <codeph>id</codeph> attribute</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;conbody&gt;</codeph> — the body of the concept</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph> — organizes content into titled subsections</li>
        <li>Allows: paragraphs, lists, tables, notes, code blocks, and images</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Use when:</b> Explaining what something is, why it matters, how things compare, or providing background knowledge.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="task-topics">
      <title>Task topics: "How do I...?"</title>
      <p>A task topic teaches a step-by-step procedure. DITA tasks have a strict structure that ensures every procedure includes prerequisites, numbered steps, and expected results.</p>
      <p><b>Structure:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd"&gt;
&lt;task id="create-a-branch"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;Creating a Git Branch&lt;/title&gt;
  &lt;shortdesc&gt;Create a new branch for your feature work.&lt;/shortdesc&gt;
  &lt;taskbody&gt;
    &lt;prereq&gt;
      &lt;ul&gt;&lt;li&gt;Git installed and configured&lt;/li&gt;&lt;/ul&gt;
    &lt;/prereq&gt;
    &lt;context&gt;
      &lt;p&gt;Branches let you work on features without
        affecting the main code.&lt;/p&gt;
    &lt;/context&gt;
    &lt;steps&gt;
      &lt;step&gt;
        &lt;cmd&gt;Open your terminal.&lt;/cmd&gt;
      &lt;/step&gt;
      &lt;step&gt;
        &lt;cmd&gt;Run &lt;codeph&gt;git checkout -b feature-name&lt;/codeph&gt;.&lt;/cmd&gt;
        &lt;stepresult&gt;Git creates and switches to the new branch.&lt;/stepresult&gt;
      &lt;/step&gt;
    &lt;/steps&gt;
    &lt;result&gt;
      &lt;p&gt;Verify with &lt;codeph&gt;git branch&lt;/codeph&gt; — your
        new branch should be marked with an asterisk.&lt;/p&gt;
    &lt;/result&gt;
  &lt;/taskbody&gt;
&lt;/task&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>Key elements:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><codeph>&lt;taskbody&gt;</codeph> — the task body</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;prereq&gt;</codeph> — what the reader needs before starting</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;context&gt;</codeph> — why they are doing this</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;steps&gt;</codeph> — numbered procedure steps</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;step&gt;</codeph> → <codeph>&lt;cmd&gt;</codeph> — each step has a command (the action)</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;stepresult&gt;</codeph> — what the reader should see after the step</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;result&gt;</codeph> — the overall outcome when all steps are done</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Use when:</b> Installation guides, how-to procedures, configuration steps, tutorials.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="reference-topics">
      <title>Reference topics: "What are the options?"</title>
      <p>A reference topic provides structured data for lookup — parameters, options, error codes, specifications.</p>
      <p><b>Structure:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE reference PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Reference//EN" "reference.dtd"&gt;
&lt;reference id="git-commands"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;Common Git Commands&lt;/title&gt;
  &lt;shortdesc&gt;Frequently used Git commands and their purpose.&lt;/shortdesc&gt;
  &lt;refbody&gt;
    &lt;table&gt;
      &lt;tgroup cols="2"&gt;
        &lt;thead&gt;
          &lt;row&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Command&lt;/entry&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Description&lt;/entry&gt;
          &lt;/row&gt;
        &lt;/thead&gt;
        &lt;tbody&gt;
          &lt;row&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;&lt;codeph&gt;git init&lt;/codeph&gt;&lt;/entry&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Initialize a new repository&lt;/entry&gt;
          &lt;/row&gt;
          &lt;row&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;&lt;codeph&gt;git clone&lt;/codeph&gt;&lt;/entry&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Copy a remote repository&lt;/entry&gt;
          &lt;/row&gt;
          &lt;row&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;&lt;codeph&gt;git commit -m&lt;/codeph&gt;&lt;/entry&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Save staged changes with a message&lt;/entry&gt;
          &lt;/row&gt;
        &lt;/tbody&gt;
      &lt;/tgroup&gt;
    &lt;/table&gt;
  &lt;/refbody&gt;
&lt;/reference&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>Key elements:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><codeph>&lt;refbody&gt;</codeph> — the reference body</li>
        <li>Typically contains tables, property lists, or syntax definitions</li>
        <li>Can use <codeph>&lt;simpletable&gt;</codeph> for lightweight tables or <codeph>&lt;properties&gt;</codeph> for name-value lists</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Use when:</b> API references, CLI options, configuration parameters, error codes, glossary entries.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="choosing-types">
      <title>Quick decision guide</title>
      <p>When creating a new topic, ask:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Am I explaining <b>what</b> something is or <b>why</b> it matters? → <b>Concept</b></li>
        <li>Am I teaching someone <b>how</b> to do something? → <b>Task</b></li>
        <li>Am I providing <b>facts</b> for someone to look up? → <b>Reference</b></li>
      </ul>
      <p>If a single source mixes all three purposes, split it into separate topics — one per purpose. This separation is how DITA achieves reusability and consistency.</p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
