<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="exercise-first-dita-project">
  <title>Exercise 4: Your First DITA Project</title>
  <shortdesc>Apply everything you have learned by creating a complete DITA mini-project — concept, task, and reference topics assembled into a map and built into HTML5 output.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <audience type="user" experiencelevel="novice"/>
      <othermeta name="persona" content="Both"/>
      <othermeta name="phase" content="4"/>
      <othermeta name="estimated-time" content="90-120 minutes"/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>
    <prereq>
      <ul>
        <li>Completed Exercises 1-3</li>
        <li>Read Part 4: Chapters 11-13 (What Is DITA, Topic Types, Maps and Publishing)</li>
        <li>DITA Open Toolkit (DITA-OT) installed — download from <codeph>https://www.dita-ot.org</codeph></li>
        <li>Java 17 or later installed (required by DITA-OT)</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <context>
      <p>You will create documentation for BookVault — the fictional online library system from the earlier exercises. This time, you will write in DITA format using proper topic types, assemble topics into a map, and build HTML5 output.</p>
      <p>Create a project folder: <filepath>bookvault-docs/</filepath></p>
    </context>

    <steps>
      <!-- Exercise 4.1: Concept topic -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create a concept topic: <filepath>bookvault-docs/what-is-bookvault.dita</filepath></cmd>
        <info>
          <p><b>Requirements:</b></p>
          <ul>
            <li>DOCTYPE: <codeph>&lt;!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd"&gt;</codeph></li>
            <li>Include <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph> and <codeph>&lt;shortdesc&gt;</codeph></li>
            <li>Include at least two <codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph> elements with titles inside <codeph>&lt;conbody&gt;</codeph></li>
            <li>Use <codeph>&lt;ul&gt;</codeph> for a feature list</li>
            <li>Include a <codeph>&lt;table&gt;</codeph> comparing BookVault to a traditional library</li>
            <li>Add one <codeph>&lt;note type="tip"&gt;</codeph></li>
          </ul>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>The file should be well-formed XML (check in your editor).</p>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.2: Task topic -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create a task topic: <filepath>bookvault-docs/creating-an-account.dita</filepath></cmd>
        <info>
          <p><b>Requirements:</b></p>
          <ul>
            <li>DOCTYPE: task.dtd</li>
            <li>Include <codeph>&lt;prereq&gt;</codeph> listing requirements (email, age 13+)</li>
            <li>Include <codeph>&lt;context&gt;</codeph> explaining why an account is needed</li>
            <li>Write 5-7 <codeph>&lt;step&gt;</codeph> elements for the registration process</li>
            <li>At least one step must have <codeph>&lt;substeps&gt;</codeph> (e.g., for configuring profile settings)</li>
            <li>At least two steps must have <codeph>&lt;stepresult&gt;</codeph></li>
            <li>Include a <codeph>&lt;result&gt;</codeph> section with a verification check</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.3: Reference topic -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create a reference topic: <filepath>bookvault-docs/search-options.dita</filepath></cmd>
        <info>
          <p><b>Requirements:</b></p>
          <ul>
            <li>DOCTYPE: reference.dtd</li>
            <li>Include a <codeph>&lt;table&gt;</codeph> with columns: Search Field, Syntax, Example, Description</li>
            <li>Document at least 6 search options (title, author, ISBN, category, year, keyword)</li>
            <li>Add a <codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph> with <codeph>&lt;codeblock&gt;</codeph> showing example search queries</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.4: DITA Map -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create a DITA map: <filepath>bookvault-docs/bookvault-guide.ditamap</filepath></cmd>
        <info>
          <p><b>Requirements:</b></p>
          <ul>
            <li>DOCTYPE: map.dtd</li>
            <li>Include a <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph></li>
            <li>Add <codeph>&lt;topicref&gt;</codeph> elements for all three topics in logical order</li>
            <li>Nest the task and reference topics under the concept topic to create a hierarchy</li>
          </ul>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE map PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Map//EN" "map.dtd"&gt;
&lt;map id="bookvault-guide"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;BookVault User Guide&lt;/title&gt;
  &lt;topicref href="what-is-bookvault.dita"&gt;
    &lt;topicref href="creating-an-account.dita"/&gt;
    &lt;topicref href="search-options.dita"/&gt;
  &lt;/topicref&gt;
&lt;/map&gt;</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.5: Build -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Build your DITA project to HTML5.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --input=bookvault-docs/bookvault-guide.ditamap \
     --format=html5 \
     --output=out/bookvault</codeblock>
          <p>If DITA-OT is not in your PATH, use the full path to the <codeph>dita</codeph> command.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>The build should complete without errors. Open <filepath>out/bookvault/index.html</filepath> in your browser and verify:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>Table of contents appears based on your map structure</li>
            <li>Concept topic renders with sections, lists, and tables</li>
            <li>Task topic renders with numbered steps and substeps</li>
            <li>Reference topic renders with a formatted table</li>
          </ul>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.6: Reflection -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Reflect on the connection between XML, schemas, and DITA.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Answer these questions:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>Open one of your DITA files — where is the <b>DOCTYPE</b> declaration? What DTD does it reference?</li>
            <li>What happens if you put a <codeph>&lt;steps&gt;</codeph> element inside a concept topic? (Try it!) Why does validation fail?</li>
            <li>How does the DITA DTD enforce information typing? (Hint: the <codeph>concept.dtd</codeph> only allows <codeph>&lt;conbody&gt;</codeph>, not <codeph>&lt;taskbody&gt;</codeph>.)</li>
            <li>Where do XML elements, attributes, and tree structure appear in DITA?</li>
            <li>How does the map use the XML tree (parent-child nesting) to create the TOC hierarchy?</li>
          </ul>
          <note type="important">This is the key insight of this training: DITA is XML with a purpose-built schema. Every XML concept you learned — elements, attributes, trees, DTDs, validation — is the foundation that makes DITA work.</note>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps>

    <result>
      <p><b>Self-Check — you should now be able to:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>✓ Create valid DITA concept, task, and reference topics from scratch</li>
        <li>✓ Assemble topics into a DITA map</li>
        <li>✓ Build HTML5 output using DITA-OT</li>
        <li>✓ Explain how DITA uses XML, DTDs, and validation</li>
        <li>✓ Understand why topic typing enforces structure</li>
        <li>✓ Navigate and verify DITA output in a browser</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Next Steps:</b> To continue your DITA learning journey, explore the <b>Extense DITA Training Guide</b> — which covers information architecture, content reuse, metadata enrichment, publishing automation, and advanced development topics.</p>
    </result>
  </taskbody>
</task>
