<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="exercise-dtd-validation">
  <title>Exercise 2: Writing DTDs and Validating XML</title>
  <shortdesc>Practice writing DTD element and attribute declarations, connecting DTDs to XML documents, and using validation to catch structural errors.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <audience type="user" experiencelevel="novice"/>
      <othermeta name="persona" content="Both"/>
      <othermeta name="phase" content="2"/>
      <othermeta name="estimated-time" content="60-90 minutes"/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>
    <prereq>
      <ul>
        <li>Completed Exercise 1 (XML Basics)</li>
        <li>Read Part 2: Chapters 5-7 (What Is DTD, Element Declarations, Attributes and Entities)</li>
        <li>An XML editor that supports DTD validation (VS Code with XML extension, or Oxygen XML)</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <context>
      <p>You will create DTDs for BookVault's XML documents and experience how schema validation catches errors that well-formedness checking alone misses.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>
      <!-- Exercise 2.1: Write a DTD for the catalog -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create an external DTD file: <filepath>xml-exercises/catalog.dtd</filepath></cmd>
        <info>
          <p><b>Requirements:</b></p>
          <ul>
            <li>Declare a <codeph>&lt;catalog&gt;</codeph> element containing one or more <codeph>&lt;book&gt;</codeph> elements</li>
            <li>Declare <codeph>&lt;book&gt;</codeph> with children: <codeph>title</codeph>, <codeph>author+</codeph>, <codeph>year</codeph>, <codeph>price</codeph>, <codeph>description?</codeph> (in that order)</li>
            <li>Declare all child elements as <codeph>#PCDATA</codeph></li>
            <li>Declare <codeph>&lt;description&gt;</codeph> with mixed content: text, <codeph>&lt;bold&gt;</codeph>, and <codeph>&lt;italic&gt;</codeph></li>
            <li>Add attributes to <codeph>&lt;book&gt;</codeph>: <codeph>isbn</codeph> (CDATA, required), <codeph>category</codeph> (enumeration: fiction|non-fiction|technical, required)</li>
            <li>Add a <codeph>currency</codeph> attribute to <codeph>&lt;price&gt;</codeph> (CDATA, default "USD")</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>Your DTD file should be syntactically correct.</p>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 2.2: Connect and validate -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Update your <filepath>catalog.xml</filepath> to reference the DTD, then validate it.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Add a DOCTYPE declaration after the XML declaration:</p>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!DOCTYPE catalog SYSTEM "catalog.dtd"&gt;</codeblock>
          <p>Make sure your XML document conforms to the DTD rules — add <codeph>isbn</codeph> attributes, ensure correct element order, etc.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>Your editor should report: "Document is valid" (no validation errors).</p>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 2.3: Break validation intentionally -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Deliberately break validation to understand error messages.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Try each of these changes one at a time and observe the error message:</p>
          <ol>
            <li>Remove a required <codeph>isbn</codeph> attribute — what error does the validator report?</li>
            <li>Put <codeph>&lt;author&gt;</codeph> before <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph> — what error?</li>
            <li>Add an element not declared in the DTD (e.g., <codeph>&lt;rating&gt;</codeph>) — what error?</li>
            <li>Use a category value not in the enumeration (e.g., <codeph>category="mystery"</codeph>) — what error?</li>
          </ol>
          <p>Revert each change before trying the next.</p>
          <note type="tip">Learning to read validation error messages is one of the most valuable skills in XML work. The error usually tells you exactly what is wrong and where.</note>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 2.4: Entities -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Add entity declarations to your DTD and use them in your XML.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p><b>Requirements:</b></p>
          <ul>
            <li>Define a general entity <codeph>publisher</codeph> with value "BookVault Publishing"</li>
            <li>Define a general entity <codeph>copyright-notice</codeph> with a copyright message</li>
            <li>Add a <codeph>&lt;publisher&gt;</codeph> element to the DTD and use the entity in your XML</li>
            <li>(Optional) Define a parameter entity for the inline content model <codeph>(#PCDATA | bold | italic)*</codeph> and apply it to multiple elements</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 2.5: Internal DTD -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create a new file <filepath>xml-exercises/note.xml</filepath> with an internal DTD.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p><b>Requirements:</b></p>
          <ul>
            <li>Define the DTD inline inside the XML document</li>
            <li>Elements: <codeph>&lt;note&gt;</codeph> containing <codeph>&lt;to&gt;</codeph>, <codeph>&lt;from&gt;</codeph>, <codeph>&lt;subject&gt;</codeph>, <codeph>&lt;body&gt;</codeph></li>
            <li>Add a <codeph>priority</codeph> attribute to <codeph>&lt;note&gt;</codeph> with enumerated values: low, normal, high (default: normal)</li>
            <li>Write a sample note and validate it</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps>

    <result>
      <p><b>Self-Check — you should now be able to:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>✓ Write element declarations with sequences, choices, and occurrence indicators</li>
        <li>✓ Write attribute declarations with types and default behaviors</li>
        <li>✓ Create both internal and external DTDs</li>
        <li>✓ Connect an XML document to its DTD via DOCTYPE</li>
        <li>✓ Validate XML against a DTD and interpret error messages</li>
        <li>✓ Define and use general entities</li>
        <li>✓ Explain the difference between well-formed and valid</li>
      </ul>
    </result>
  </taskbody>
</task>
