<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="installing-dita-ot" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Installing DITA-OT</title>
  <shortdesc>Download, install, and verify DITA Open Toolkit 4.x on your machine.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Installation</indexterm><indexterm>DITA-OT setup</indexterm><indexterm>Java</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:getting-started</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="beginner"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="technical-writer"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="developer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="installing-dita-ot"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="beginner"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT15M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="dita-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="how-to"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="publishing-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="none"/>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>

    <prereq>
      <p><b>After completing this chapter, you will be able to:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>Install DITA-OT 4.x on Windows, macOS, or Linux</li>
        <li>Verify the installation works correctly</li>
        <li>Run your first DITA build</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Prerequisites:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Java 17 or later</b> — DITA-OT 4.x requires Java 17+. Check with <codeph>java -version</codeph>.</li>
        <li><b>500 MB free disk space</b> for the toolkit and build artifacts.</li>
        <li><b>Network access</b> to download the release archive.</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <context>
      <p>DITA-OT is a free, open-source publishing engine that transforms DITA XML into HTML5, PDF, and other formats. It is the standard toolchain for DITA publishing.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>
      <step id="step-check-java">
        <cmd>Verify Java is installed and meets the minimum version.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">java -version</codeblock>
          <p>You should see output like <codeph>openjdk version "17.0.x"</codeph> or higher. If Java is not installed or is too old:</p>
          <ul>
            <li><b>macOS:</b> <codeph>brew install openjdk@17</codeph></li>
            <li><b>Ubuntu/Debian:</b> <codeph>sudo apt install openjdk-17-jdk</codeph></li>
            <li><b>Windows:</b> Download from <xref href="https://adoptium.net" scope="external" format="html">adoptium.net</xref></li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-download">
        <cmd>Download the latest DITA-OT release.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Visit <xref href="https://www.dita-ot.org/download" scope="external" format="html">dita-ot.org/download</xref> and download the zip archive, or use the command line:</p>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Replace 4.3.5 with the latest version
curl -LO https://github.com/dita-ot/dita-ot/releases/download/4.3.5/dita-ot-4.3.5.zip</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-extract">
        <cmd>Extract the archive to a permanent location.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Linux / macOS
unzip dita-ot-4.3.5.zip -d /opt/
# The toolkit is now at /opt/dita-ot-4.3.5/

# Windows (PowerShell)
Expand-Archive dita-ot-4.3.5.zip -DestinationPath C:\dita-ot</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-set-path">
        <cmd>Add the DITA-OT <filepath>bin/</filepath> directory to your PATH.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Linux / macOS — add to ~/.bashrc or ~/.zshrc
export DITA_HOME=/opt/dita-ot-4.3.5
export PATH="$DITA_HOME/bin:$PATH"

# Apply immediately
source ~/.bashrc</codeblock>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-powershell"># Windows PowerShell — add to profile
$env:DITA_HOME = "C:\dita-ot\dita-ot-4.3.5"
$env:PATH = "$env:DITA_HOME\bin;$env:PATH"</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-verify">
        <cmd>Verify the installation.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --version</codeblock>
          <p><b>Expected output:</b></p>
          <codeblock>DITA-OT version 4.3.5</codeblock>
          <p>Also list installed plugins to confirm a working installation:</p>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --plugins</codeblock>
          <p>You should see a list including <codeph>org.dita.html5</codeph>, <codeph>org.dita.pdf2</codeph>, and others.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-test-build">
        <cmd>Run a test build using the included samples.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Build the included sample to HTML5
dita -i $DITA_HOME/docsrc/samples/sequence.ditamap -f html5 -o /tmp/dita-test-output</codeblock>
          <p>Open <filepath>/tmp/dita-test-output/index.html</filepath> in a browser to verify the output.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps>

    <result>
      <p>DITA-OT is installed and working. You can now build any DITA map into HTML5 or PDF output.</p>
    </result>

    <postreq>
      <p><b>Troubleshooting:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><b><codeph>dita: command not found</codeph></b> — Ensure <codeph>$DITA_HOME/bin</codeph> is on your PATH and restart your terminal.</li>
        <li><b><codeph>JAVA_HOME is not set</codeph></b> — Set <codeph>JAVA_HOME</codeph> to your JDK installation directory.</li>
        <li><b><codeph>Unsupported class file major version</codeph></b> — Your Java version is too old. DITA-OT 4.x requires Java 17+.</li>
        <li><b>Build succeeds but output is empty</b> — Check that your map file path is correct and the map references valid topics.</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Next step:</b> <xref href="setting-up-authoring-tools.dita">Set up your authoring tools</xref>, then move on to <xref href="../part03-author/dita-authoring.dita">Authoring DITA Topics</xref>.</p>
    </postreq>

  </taskbody>
</task>
