<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="exercises-and-labs" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Exercises and labs (hands-on)</title>
  <shortdesc>Five progressive labs that build on each other: callout note styling, step anchors with highlighting, custom meta injection, collapsible sidebar TOC, and full plug-in packaging with CI.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Labs</indexterm><indexterm>Exercises</indexterm><indexterm>Callout styling</indexterm><indexterm>Step anchors</indexterm><indexterm>CI integration</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:customization</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="developer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="exercises-and-labs"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="advanced"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT120M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="xslt"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="tutorial"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="medium"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="training"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="first-override-xslt,create-html5-plugin"/>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>
    <prereq>
      <p>Before starting these labs, set up the exercise environment:</p>
      <ol>
        <li>Navigate to the <codeph>exercises/</codeph> folder in this training repository (see <codeph>exercises/README.md</codeph> for full details).</li>
        <li>Build the baseline output (no plug-in) to see default DITA-OT rendering:
<codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita -i exercises/lab-sample.ditamap -f html5 -o exercises/out/html5 --nav-toc=full</codeblock></li>
        <li>Copy the starter plug-in into your DITA-OT install:
<codeblock outputclass="language-bash">cp -r exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs DITA-OT/plugins/
cd DITA-OT &amp;&amp; dita --install</codeblock></li>
      </ol>
      <p><b>Sample files included:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li><codeph>exercises/lab-sample.ditamap</codeph> — sample map with 5 topics</li>
        <li><codeph>exercises/topics/what-is-acmedoc.dita</codeph> — concept with all 4 note types (Lab 1)</li>
        <li><codeph>exercises/topics/install-acmedoc.dita</codeph> — task with 5 steps and IDs (Lab 2)</li>
        <li><codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/</codeph> — starter plug-in skeleton with commented templates</li>
        <li><codeph>exercises/build/html5.properties</codeph> — build properties for repeatable builds</li>
        <li><codeph>exercises/build/ditaval/web.ditaval</codeph> — DITAVAL filter sample</li>
        <li><codeph>exercises/build/sample-github-workflow.yml</codeph> — CI workflow reference (Lab 5)</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>
    <context>
<p>Each lab builds on the previous one. Complete them in order to assemble a full production plug-in. All XSLT templates and CSS in the starter files are commented out — uncomment each section as you reach that lab.</p>
    </context>
    <steps-unordered>
      <step>
        <cmd><b>Lab 1: Callout note styling</b></cmd>
        <info>
<p><b>Goal:</b> Style <codeph>&lt;note&gt;</codeph> elements as colored callout boxes with icons.</p>
<p><b>Steps:</b></p>
<ol>
  <li>Open <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/xsl/html5/override.xsl</codeph> and
    uncomment the Lab 1 section — the template matching <codeph>*[contains(@class,' topic/note ')]</codeph>:
<codeblock outputclass="language-xslt">&lt;xsl:template match="*[contains(@class,' topic/note ')]"&gt;
  &lt;div class="callout callout-{@type}" data-dita-class="{normalize-space(@class)}"&gt;
    &lt;xsl:apply-templates/&gt;
  &lt;/div&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;</codeblock></li>
  <li>Open <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/css/brand.css</codeph> and
    uncomment the Lab 1 callout styles (<codeph>.callout-note</codeph>, <codeph>.callout-warning</codeph>,
    <codeph>.callout-caution</codeph>, <codeph>.callout-tip</codeph>).</li>
  <li>Install the plug-in and build the sample map:
<codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --install
dita -i exercises/lab-sample.ditamap -f html5 -o exercises/out/html5 --nav-toc=full</codeblock></li>
  <li>Open <codeph>exercises/out/html5/what-is-acmedoc.html</codeph> — this topic contains all 4 note types.</li>
</ol>
<p><b>Expected result:</b> Notes appear as styled boxes with color-coded left borders instead of plain paragraphs.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
      <step>
        <cmd><b>Lab 2: Step anchors with URL hash highlighting</b></cmd>
        <info>
<p><b>Goal:</b> Add <codeph>id</codeph> anchors to task steps so users can link directly to a step, with JS highlight on load.</p>
<p><b>Steps:</b></p>
<ol>
  <li>In <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/xsl/html5/override.xsl</codeph>,
    uncomment the Lab 2 section — the template for <codeph>task/step</codeph>:
<codeblock outputclass="language-xslt">&lt;xsl:template match="*[contains(@class,' task/step ')]"&gt;
  &lt;li class="task-step" id="step-{position()}" data-step="{position()}"&gt;
    &lt;xsl:apply-templates/&gt;
  &lt;/li&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;</codeblock></li>
  <li>In <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/js/step-highlight.js</codeph>,
    uncomment the entire script. It detects <codeph>#step-N</codeph> URL hashes, scrolls to the matching
    element, and adds a <codeph>.highlighted</codeph> CSS class.</li>
  <li>In <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/css/brand.css</codeph>,
    uncomment the Lab 2 step-highlight styles (<codeph>.highlighted</codeph> with yellow background and transition).</li>
  <li>Rebuild and open <codeph>exercises/out/html5/install-acmedoc.html#step-3</codeph> — this task
    has 5 steps, each with unique IDs like <codeph>step-download</codeph>, <codeph>step-extract</codeph>, etc.</li>
</ol>
<p><b>Expected result:</b> Navigating to <codeph>page.html#step-3</codeph> scrolls to and highlights step 3.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
      <step>
        <cmd><b>Lab 3: Custom meta tag injection</b></cmd>
        <info>
<p><b>Goal:</b> Add a <codeph>&lt;meta name=&quot;generator&quot; content=&quot;DITA-OT + com.extense.html5.labs&quot;&gt;</codeph> tag to every page.</p>
<p><b>Steps:</b></p>
<ol>
  <li>In the DITA-OT source, locate the named template <codeph>gen-user-head</codeph> in
    <codeph>plugins/org.dita.html5/xsl/topic.xsl</codeph> — this empty template is called from
    <codeph>chapterHead</codeph> specifically for user customizations. Override it to inject meta tags.</li>
  <li>Uncomment the Lab 3 section in <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/xsl/html5/override.xsl</codeph>.
    The template overrides the empty <codeph>gen-user-head</codeph> and adds your custom meta tags
    directly — no <codeph>xsl:next-match</codeph> needed since the default template is empty:
<codeblock outputclass="language-xslt">&lt;xsl:template name="gen-user-head"&gt;
  &lt;meta name="generator" content="DITA-OT + com.extense.html5.labs"/&gt;
  &lt;meta name="dita-class" content="{normalize-space(/*/@class)}"/&gt;
&lt;/xsl:template&gt;</codeblock></li>
  <li>Rebuild:
<codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --install
dita -i exercises/lab-sample.ditamap -f html5 -o exercises/out/html5 --nav-toc=full</codeblock></li>
  <li>Open any output page and view source — confirm both custom meta tags appear in the <codeph>&lt;head&gt;</codeph>.</li>
</ol>
<p><b>Expected result:</b> Every HTML page contains your custom meta tags in the <codeph>&lt;head&gt;</codeph>.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
      <step>
        <cmd><b>Lab 4: Collapsible sidebar TOC</b></cmd>
        <info>
<p><b>Goal:</b> Override the TOC to add CSS classes and make it a collapsible sidebar.</p>
<p><b>Steps:</b></p>
<ol>
  <li>Open <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/xsl/toc/toc-override.xsl</codeph> and
    uncomment the template. It wraps the TOC in a <codeph>&lt;nav class=&quot;sidebar-toc&quot;&gt;</codeph>
    with <codeph>data-level</codeph> attributes on each <codeph>&lt;li&gt;</codeph> for nested styling.</li>
  <li>In <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/css/brand.css</codeph>, uncomment the Lab 4
    sidebar TOC styles:
<codeblock outputclass="language-css">.sidebar-toc { position: sticky; top: 0; max-height: 100vh; overflow-y: auto; }
.sidebar-toc li[data-level="2"] { padding-left: 1rem; }
.sidebar-toc li[data-level="3"] { padding-left: 2rem; }</codeblock></li>
  <li>In <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/js/sidebar-toggle.js</codeph>, uncomment
    the toggle script. It adds a hamburger button on viewports narrower than 768px.</li>
  <li>Rebuild the sample map (which has 3 levels of nesting) and verify the sidebar renders correctly:
<codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --install
dita -i exercises/lab-sample.ditamap -f html5 -o exercises/out/html5 --nav-toc=full</codeblock></li>
</ol>
<p><b>Expected result:</b> A sticky, scrollable sidebar TOC with indented levels and a collapse toggle.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
      <step>
        <cmd><b>Lab 5: Full plug-in packaging and CI integration</b></cmd>
        <info>
<p><b>Goal:</b> Package all previous labs into a single plug-in, pin the toolkit version, and automate builds.</p>
<p><b>Steps:</b></p>
<ol>
  <li>Verify the complete plug-in structure in <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/</codeph>:
<codeblock>com.extense.html5.labs/
  plugin.xml
  xsl/html5/override.xsl
  xsl/toc/toc-override.xsl
  css/brand.css
  js/step-highlight.js
  js/sidebar-toggle.js</codeblock></li>
  <li>Open <codeph>exercises/plugins/com.extense.html5.labs/plugin.xml</codeph> — confirm it declares both
    extension points (<codeph>dita.xsl.html5</codeph> and <codeph>dita.xsl.html5.toc</codeph>).</li>
  <li>Ensure all Lab 1–4 code sections are uncommented, then install and build:
<codeblock outputclass="language-bash">dita --install
dita -i exercises/lab-sample.ditamap -f html5 -o exercises/out/html5 \
  --args.cssroot=css --args.css=brand.css --args.copycss=yes --nav-toc=full</codeblock></li>
  <li>Review the CI reference at <codeph>exercises/build/sample-github-workflow.yml</codeph>.
    Adapt it for your own repository (update paths, DITA-OT version pin, and output directory).</li>
  <li>Test the upgrade path: install a newer DITA-OT version, rebuild, and diff the outputs.</li>
</ol>
<p><b>Expected result:</b> A portable, version-pinned plug-in that builds in CI and produces consistent output across upgrades.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps-unordered>
    <postreq>
      <p><b>Verification checklist — confirm each after completing the corresponding lab:</b></p>
      <ol>
        <li><b>Lab 1:</b> Open <codeph>what-is-acmedoc.html</codeph> — all 4 note types (note, tip, warning, caution) render as colored callout boxes with distinct left borders.</li>
        <li><b>Lab 2:</b> Open <codeph>install-acmedoc.html#step-3</codeph> — the page scrolls to step 3 and highlights it with a yellow background.</li>
        <li><b>Lab 3:</b> View source on any output page — <codeph>&lt;meta name="generator"&gt;</codeph> and <codeph>&lt;meta name="dita-class"&gt;</codeph> appear in the <codeph>&lt;head&gt;</codeph>.</li>
        <li><b>Lab 4:</b> Open any page — a sticky sidebar TOC with indented levels appears. On mobile widths (below 768px), a toggle button shows/hides it.</li>
        <li><b>Lab 5:</b> Push to a GitHub repo with the sample workflow — the CI build succeeds and publishes to <codeph>gh-pages</codeph>.</li>
      </ol>
    </postreq>
  </taskbody>
</task>
