<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="xslt-customization-tutorial" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>XSLT Customization Tutorial</title>
  <shortdesc>This tutorial teaches a practical, production-style way to customize HTML output from DITA using XSLT, primarily through DITA Open Toolkit DITA-OT 4.x plug-ins and official extension points.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-01-15"/>
      <revised modified="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>XSLT</indexterm><indexterm>Customization</indexterm><indexterm>Tutorial</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:customization</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="developer"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="advanced-user"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="xslt-customization-tutorial"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="advanced"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT90M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="xslt"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="tutorial"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="medium"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="xml-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="dita-publishing,dita-ot-technical-reference"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>
<p>Core goals covered:</p>
<ul>
  <li><b>Sidebar TOC</b> embedded in every topic page (<codeph>nav-toc=full</codeph>)</li>
  <li><b>Chunking</b> (map-driven split into multiple HTML pages)</li>
  <li><b>Filtering and build variants</b> using <b>DITAVAL</b> (examples for <codeph>audience</codeph> and <codeph>platform</codeph>)</li>
  <li>Safe, upgrade-friendly <b>XSLT override patterns</b> that work across <b>all topic types</b> and common elements</li>
</ul>
<note>Assumption: You publish with <b>DITA-OT HTML5</b> (<codeph>-f html5</codeph>). If you use a CCMS, the same patterns apply; packaging and invocation may differ.</note>
  </conbody>
<section id="analytics-instrumentation">
<title>Analytics and Instrumentation</title>
<p>Track which customization steps are most challenging for users. Use analytics to improve the tutorial and add clarifications where needed.</p>
</section>
<section id="personalization-conditional-processing">
<title>Personalization and Conditional Processing</title>
<p>Show or hide advanced steps based on user role using DITA conditional processing.</p>
</section>
<section id="chatbot-nlp-integration">
<title>Integrating with Conversational AI and NLP</title>
<p>Enable users to ask a chatbot for help with XSLT customization and receive step-by-step guidance from this tutorial.</p>
</section>
<section id="continuous-improvement-feedback">
<title>Continuous Improvement and Feedback Loops</title>
<p>Collect feedback on tutorial clarity and pain points. Use analytics and user suggestions to refine the tutorial.</p>
</section>
</concept>
