<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="topic-based-architecture" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Topic-Based Information Architecture for Training</title>
  <shortdesc>How to design a modular, map-driven information architecture that supports progressive learning paths, role-based content delivery, and AI-powered navigation.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-02-10"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Information architecture</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Topic-based authoring</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Learning paths</indexterm>
        <indexterm>DITA maps</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:intelligent-content</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="content-strategist"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="technical-writer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="topic-based-architecture"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT15M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="architecture"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="dita-information-typing"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="architecture-principles">
      <title>What are the architecture principles for AI-ready training content?</title>
      <ol>
        <li><b>Topics are self-contained:</b> Every topic should be understandable without reading the surrounding content. The chatbot may retrieve a single section from a single topic — that section must make sense on its own.</li>
        <li><b>Maps define context, not topics:</b> The sequence, hierarchy, and relationships between topics are defined in the map, not hardcoded into the topics. This allows the same topic to appear in multiple learning paths.</li>
        <li><b>Progressive depth:</b> Organize content from foundational to advanced, with explicit prerequisite chains so the chatbot can guide users through an appropriate learning path.</li>
        <li><b>Role-based navigation:</b> Use audience metadata and conditional processing to enable filtered views for different roles (technical writer, developer, manager).</li>
        <li><b>Granularity for retrieval:</b> Each topic should cover one focused subject. Each section within a topic should address one specific question. Overly broad topics produce low-quality chunks.</li>
      </ol>
    </section>

    <section id="directory-structure">
      <title>How should topics be organized in the file system?</title>
      <p>Organize topics by content domain, mapping to the taxonomy categories:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-text">dita-topics/
├── getting-started/           # Foundational, beginner content
│   ├── dita-intro-guide.dita
│   ├── installing-dita-ot.dita
│   └── setting-up-authoring-tools.dita
├── core-topics/               # Core subject area content
│   ├── dita-authoring.dita
│   ├── dita-publishing.dita
│   ├── dita-reuse-variants.dita
│   └── writing-first-dita-project.dita
├── developer-guides/          # Advanced developer content
│   ├── dita-ot-developer-handbook.dita  (parent)
│   └── devhandbook-topics/             (sub-topics)
│       ├── docker-basics.dita
│       ├── github-actions-cicd.dita
│       └── ...16 files
├── plugins-and-customization/ # Plugin development content
│   ├── xslt-customization-tutorial.dita (parent)
│   └── xslt-topics/                    (sub-topics)
│       ├── create-html5-plugin.dita
│       ├── debugging-workflow.dita
│       └── ...18 files
├── intelligent-content/       # Meta: AI authoring guidelines
│   ├── ai-ready-authoring-guide.dita
│   ├── schema-org-mapping.dita
│   ├── extense-taxonomy.subjectScheme
│   ├── chatbot-config.json
│   └── chatbot-data/
└── reference/                 # Lookup content
    ├── glossary.dita
    ├── architecture-diagram.dita
    └── plugin-reference.dita</codeblock>
      <p><b>Why this structure matters for AI:</b> The directory organization mirrors the content domain taxonomy, making it easy to maintain classification consistency. The <codeph>chatbot-data/</codeph> directory keeps generated artifacts separate from source content.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="map-architecture">
      <title>How should the bookmap define learning paths?</title>
      <p>The bookmap creates a progressive learning sequence where each chapter builds on the previous:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;bookmap id="extense-training-guide"&gt;
  &lt;!-- Part 1: Foundation --&gt;
  &lt;part&gt;
    &lt;topicmeta&gt;&lt;navtitle&gt;Getting Started&lt;/navtitle&gt;&lt;/topicmeta&gt;
    &lt;chapter href="getting-started/dita-intro-guide.dita"&gt;
      &lt;topicref href="getting-started/installing-dita-ot.dita"/&gt;
      &lt;topicref href="getting-started/setting-up-tools.dita"/&gt;
    &lt;/chapter&gt;
  &lt;/part&gt;

  &lt;!-- Part 2: Core skills --&gt;
  &lt;part&gt;
    &lt;topicmeta&gt;&lt;navtitle&gt;Core DITA Skills&lt;/navtitle&gt;&lt;/topicmeta&gt;
    &lt;chapter href="core-topics/dita-authoring.dita"/&gt;
    &lt;chapter href="core-topics/dita-reuse-variants.dita"/&gt;
    &lt;chapter href="core-topics/dita-publishing.dita"/&gt;
  &lt;/part&gt;

  &lt;!-- Part 3: Advanced (developer audience) --&gt;
  &lt;part&gt;
    &lt;topicmeta&gt;&lt;navtitle&gt;Advanced Development&lt;/navtitle&gt;&lt;/topicmeta&gt;
    &lt;chapter href="developer-guides/dita-ot-developer-handbook.dita"&gt;
      &lt;topicref href="developer-guides/devhandbook-topics/docker-basics.dita"/&gt;
      &lt;topicref href="developer-guides/devhandbook-topics/github-actions-cicd.dita"/&gt;
      &lt;!-- ...more sub-topics --&gt;
    &lt;/chapter&gt;
  &lt;/part&gt;
&lt;/bookmap&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>The map hierarchy gives the chatbot three critical signals:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Sequence:</b> Topics should be read in this order for maximum comprehension</li>
        <li><b>Nesting:</b> Sub-topics are detailed elaborations of their parent topic</li>
        <li><b>Grouping:</b> Parts group topically related content for navigation</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="topic-granularity">
      <title>How granular should topics and sections be?</title>
      <p>The right granularity depends on the content purpose:</p>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="level" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="guide" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="why" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Level</entry>
              <entry>Guideline</entry>
              <entry>AI rationale</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>Topic</entry>
              <entry>One focused subject per topic. 500–3000 words. 3–8 sections.</entry>
              <entry>Topics that are too long produce too many chunks; too short topics waste metadata overhead.</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Section</entry>
              <entry>One question or concept per section. 100–1200 tokens (1–6 paragraphs).</entry>
              <entry>Each section becomes a separately retrievable chunk. It must make sense on its own with the inherited topic metadata.</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Shortdesc</entry>
              <entry>One sentence, 25–35 words. Describe purpose, not content.</entry>
              <entry>Prepended to every chunk as summary. Vague shortdescs degrade every chunk from that topic.</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Section title</entry>
              <entry>Phrase as a question when possible.</entry>
              <entry>"How does conref work?" matches user queries better than "Conref Overview".</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
