<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="phase5-capstone-project">
  <title>Phase 5 Capstone Exercise: End-to-End DITA Project</title>
  <shortdesc>Bring together all skills from Phases 1-4 in a comprehensive capstone project. Technical writers focus on content strategy and multi-variant publishing. Software engineers focus on automation, CI/CD, and plugin polish.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <audience type="user" experiencelevel="general"/>
      <othermeta name="persona" content="Both"/>
      <othermeta name="phase" content="5"/>
      <othermeta name="estimated-time" content="2-3 hours"/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>
    <prereq>
      <ul>
        <li>Completed all previous phase exercises</li>
        <li>Read Part 9 (AI Integration) and Part 10 (Benefits and Impact) topics</li>
        <li>Working TaskFlow documentation project with plugin</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <context>
      <p>This capstone combines everything into a realistic documentation project.
      You will expand your TaskFlow docs into a production-quality deliverable with
      multiple audiences, automated builds, and quality checks.</p>
      <p>Choose the track matching your role, or complete both for full mastery.</p>
    </context>

    <steps-unordered>
      <!-- =====================================================
           WRITER TRACK
           ===================================================== -->
      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Writer Track]</b> Expand the content library to 8+ topics.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Add these new topics to your TaskFlow project:</p>
          <ol>
            <li><b>Concept:</b> "TaskFlow Architecture" — explain the component architecture</li>
            <li><b>Task:</b> "Configuring TaskFlow" — step-by-step configuration</li>
            <li><b>Task:</b> "Importing and Exporting Data" — data management workflow</li>
            <li><b>Reference:</b> "Configuration File Reference" — table of all config options</li>
            <li><b>Concept:</b> "Troubleshooting Common Issues" — FAQ-style troubleshooting</li>
          </ol>
          <p><b>Requirements:</b></p>
          <ul>
            <li>Use keyrefs for all product names</li>
            <li>Use conref for repeated content (system requirements, support info)</li>
            <li>Add audience profiling (end-user, admin, developer) where appropriate</li>
            <li>Add metadata with keywords and index terms to every topic</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Writer Track]</b> Create a bookmap with proper front matter.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Convert your flat map to a <codeph>&lt;bookmap&gt;</codeph> with:</p>
          <ul>
            <li><codeph>&lt;booktitle&gt;</codeph> with main and alternative titles</li>
            <li><codeph>&lt;bookmeta&gt;</codeph> with author and copyright info</li>
            <li><codeph>&lt;frontmatter&gt;</codeph> with a preface topic</li>
            <li><codeph>&lt;chapter&gt;</codeph> elements grouping related topics</li>
            <li><codeph>&lt;backmatter&gt;</codeph> with a glossary</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Writer Track]</b> Build 3 audience variants and compare outputs.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create three DITAVAL files and build each:</p>
          <ol>
            <li><b>End-user guide:</b> excludes admin and developer content</li>
            <li><b>Admin guide:</b> includes admin, excludes developer</li>
            <li><b>Developer guide:</b> includes developer, excludes admin</li>
          </ol>
          <p>Create a comparison document noting which topics/sections appear in each variant.
          This demonstrates the ROI of single-source publishing.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- =====================================================
           ENGINEER TRACK
           ===================================================== -->
      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Engineer Track]</b> Create a build script for all variants.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create <filepath>build.sh</filepath> that builds all variants in sequence:</p>
          <codeblock>#!/bin/bash
set -e

DITAMAP="taskflow.ditamap"
DITA_CMD="dita"

echo "Building TaskFlow Documentation..."

# Clean output
rm -rf out/

# End-user HTML5
echo "==> Building end-user HTML5..."
$DITA_CMD -i "$DITAMAP" -f taskflow-html5 \
  -o out/html5-enduser \
  --filter=filters/end-user.ditaval

# Admin HTML5
echo "==> Building admin HTML5..."
$DITA_CMD -i "$DITAMAP" -f taskflow-html5 \
  -o out/html5-admin \
  --filter=filters/admin.ditaval

# PDF (unfiltered)
echo "==> Building PDF..."
$DITA_CMD -i "$DITAMAP" -f pdf \
  -o out/pdf

echo "Done! Outputs in out/"</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Engineer Track]</b> Create a GitHub Actions workflow for CI/CD.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create <filepath>.github/workflows/build-docs.yml</filepath>:</p>
          <codeblock>name: Build Documentation
on:
  push:
    branches: [main]
    paths: ['taskflow-docs/**']
  pull_request:
    paths: ['taskflow-docs/**']

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Setup Java
        uses: actions/setup-java@v4
        with:
          java-version: '17'
          distribution: 'temurin'

      - name: Install DITA-OT
        run: |
          curl -sL https://github.com/dita-ot/dita-ot/releases/download/4.2.3/dita-ot-4.2.3.zip -o dita-ot.zip
          unzip -q dita-ot.zip
          echo "$PWD/dita-ot-4.2.3/bin" &gt;&gt; $GITHUB_PATH

      - name: Install custom plugin
        run: |
          cp -r com.taskflow.html5 dita-ot-4.2.3/plugins/
          dita --install

      - name: Build all variants
        run: bash build.sh

      - name: Upload artifacts
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
        with:
          name: taskflow-docs
          path: out/</codeblock>
          <note type="tip">This CI pipeline ensures every push builds the docs. Failed builds
          block merges — treating docs like code with the same quality gates.</note>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Engineer Track]</b> Dockerize the build for reproducibility.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create a <filepath>Dockerfile</filepath>:</p>
          <codeblock>FROM eclipse-temurin:17-jre-alpine

# Install DITA-OT
ARG DITA_OT_VERSION=4.2.3
RUN wget -q "https://github.com/dita-ot/dita-ot/releases/download/${DITA_OT_VERSION}/dita-ot-${DITA_OT_VERSION}.zip" \
    &amp;&amp; unzip -q "dita-ot-${DITA_OT_VERSION}.zip" \
    &amp;&amp; rm "dita-ot-${DITA_OT_VERSION}.zip"

ENV DITA_HOME=/dita-ot-${DITA_OT_VERSION}
ENV PATH="${DITA_HOME}/bin:${PATH}"

# Install custom plugin
COPY com.taskflow.html5/ ${DITA_HOME}/plugins/com.taskflow.html5/
RUN dita --install

WORKDIR /docs
ENTRYPOINT ["dita"]</codeblock>
          <p>Build and test:</p>
          <codeblock>docker build -t taskflow-dita .
docker run --rm -v "$PWD/taskflow-docs:/docs" \
  taskflow-dita -i taskflow.ditamap -f taskflow-html5 -o /docs/out</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- =====================================================
           BOTH TRACKS
           ===================================================== -->
      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Both]</b> Prepare your content for AI retrieval (Part 9 application).</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Apply the concepts from Part 9 (AI Integration) to your TaskFlow project:</p>
          <ol>
            <li>Add <codeph>id</codeph> attributes to every <codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph> — these become chunk boundaries for RAG ingestion</li>
            <li>Rephrase key section titles as questions (matching how users ask chatbots) — e.g. "How do I configure TaskFlow?" instead of "Configuration"</li>
            <li>Ensure every topic has complete prolog metadata: <codeph>&lt;audience&gt;</codeph>, <codeph>&lt;category&gt;</codeph>, <codeph>&lt;keywords&gt;</codeph></li>
            <li>Write a one-page architecture brief describing how a RAG pipeline would ingest your DITA
            content — reference the 4-stage pipeline (ingest → retrieve → rerank → generate) from
            <filepath>ch11-rag-pipeline-architecture.dita</filepath></li>
          </ol>
          <note type="tip">Compare your metadata-enriched topics with the
          <filepath>samples/before/</filepath> and <filepath>samples/after/</filepath> files
          to verify you are following AI-ready patterns.</note>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Both]</b> Perform a final quality review of your complete project.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Use this checklist:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>☐ All topics build without errors or warnings</li>
            <li>☐ All keyrefs resolve (no "???" in output)</li>
            <li>☐ All conrefs pull content correctly</li>
            <li>☐ DITAVAL filtering produces distinct variants</li>
            <li>☐ Every topic has metadata (keywords, audience)</li>
            <li>☐ Navigation structure is logical and complete</li>
            <li>☐ HTML5 output displays branding (styled notes, code blocks)</li>
            <li>☐ PDF output generates successfully</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd><b>[Both]</b> Write a project summary documenting your architecture decisions.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create a short README describing:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>Project structure and topic inventory</li>
            <li>Reuse strategy (what is conref'd, what uses keys)</li>
            <li>Audience variants and how filtering works</li>
            <li>Build instructions (manual and automated)</li>
            <li>What you would improve or add next</li>
          </ul>
          <p>This README serves as documentation for anyone maintaining the project after you.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps-unordered>

    <result>
      <p><b>Capstone Self-Check:</b></p>
      <p><b>Writer track — you should now be able to:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>✓ Architect a multi-topic DITA project with bookmap structure</li>
        <li>✓ Implement content reuse at scale (conref, keyref)</li>
        <li>✓ Produce filtered variants for different audiences</li>
        <li>✓ Enrich content with metadata for findability</li>
        <li>✓ Evaluate documentation quality and completeness</li>
      </ul>
      <p><b>Engineer track — you should now be able to:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>✓ Build and maintain DITA-OT plugins for branded output</li>
        <li>✓ Automate builds with shell scripts</li>
        <li>✓ Set up CI/CD pipelines for documentation</li>
        <li>✓ Containerize DITA-OT builds with Docker</li>
        <li>✓ Apply production hardening practices</li>
      </ul>
      <note type="tip"><b>Congratulations!</b> You have completed the full DITA learning path.
      Continue your learning by exploring the advanced topics in Parts 9 and 10:
      AI pipeline integration (RAG, chunking, embeddings) and measuring documentation
      impact (ROI, utilization metrics).</note>
    </result>
  </taskbody>
</task>
