<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="phase4-plugin-development">
  <title>Phase 4 Exercise: Building a Custom DITA-OT Plugin</title>
  <shortdesc>Create a complete HTML5 customization plugin with XSLT overrides, CSS branding, and DITAVAL filtering — from scaffold to production. Primary track for software engineers, optional for advanced writers.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <audience type="user" experiencelevel="general"/>
      <othermeta name="persona" content="Engineer"/>
      <othermeta name="phase" content="4"/>
      <othermeta name="estimated-time" content="90-120 minutes"/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>
    <prereq>
      <ul>
        <li>Completed Phase 3E exercise (understand the DITA-OT pipeline)</li>
        <li>Read Part 8 topics: Create HTML5 Plugin, XSLT Customization Tutorial, Safe Customization Strategies</li>
        <li>Basic familiarity with XSLT (read the XSLT Prerequisites topic if needed)</li>
        <li>TaskFlow docs project from Phase 2</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <context>
      <p>You will build a real plugin called <codeph>com.taskflow.html5</codeph> that
      customizes HTML5 output with branded styling, note callouts, and step enhancements.
      This follows the same pattern used in production DITA deployments.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>
      <!-- Exercise 4.1: Plugin scaffold -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create the plugin directory structure.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock>mkdir -p com.taskflow.html5/xsl/html5
mkdir -p com.taskflow.html5/css
mkdir -p com.taskflow.html5/js</codeblock>
          <p>Your plugin structure will be:</p>
          <codeblock>com.taskflow.html5/
├── plugin.xml          ← Plugin descriptor
├── xsl/
│   └── html5/
│       └── override.xsl  ← XSLT overrides
├── css/
│   └── brand.css        ← Custom styles
└── js/
    └── custom.js        ← Optional JavaScript</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.2: plugin.xml -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create <filepath>com.taskflow.html5/plugin.xml</filepath>.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock>&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;plugin id="com.taskflow.html5"&gt;
  &lt;!-- Require the base HTML5 plugin --&gt;
  &lt;require plugin="org.dita.html5"/&gt;

  &lt;!-- Override XSLT --&gt;
  &lt;feature extension="dita.xsl.html5" file="xsl/html5/override.xsl"/&gt;

  &lt;!-- Add custom CSS --&gt;
  &lt;feature extension="args.css" file="css/brand.css"/&gt;
  &lt;feature extension="args.cssroot" file="css"/&gt;

  &lt;transtype name="taskflow-html5" extends="html5"&gt;
    &lt;param name="nav-toc" type="enum"&gt;
      &lt;val default="true"&gt;full&lt;/val&gt;
    &lt;/param&gt;
  &lt;/transtype&gt;
&lt;/plugin&gt;</codeblock>
          <note type="important">The <codeph>&lt;require&gt;</codeph> element ensures your
          plugin loads after the HTML5 base plugin. The <codeph>&lt;feature&gt;</codeph>
          elements hook into extension points — they do NOT replace the originals,
          they extend them via XSLT import priority.</note>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.3: XSLT override for notes -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create <filepath>com.taskflow.html5/xsl/html5/override.xsl</filepath> with note styling.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock>&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;xsl:stylesheet xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"
                version="2.0"&gt;

  &lt;!-- ============================================
       Lab A: Note Callout Styling
       Override the default note rendering to add
       semantic CSS classes for styled callout boxes.
       ============================================ --&gt;
  &lt;xsl:template match="*[contains(@class, ' topic/note ')]"
                name="topic.note"&gt;
    &lt;div&gt;
      &lt;xsl:attribute name="class"&gt;
        &lt;xsl:text&gt;callout callout-&lt;/xsl:text&gt;
        &lt;xsl:choose&gt;
          &lt;xsl:when test="@type"&gt;
            &lt;xsl:value-of select="@type"/&gt;
          &lt;/xsl:when&gt;
          &lt;xsl:otherwise&gt;note&lt;/xsl:otherwise&gt;
        &lt;/xsl:choose&gt;
      &lt;/xsl:attribute&gt;
      &lt;xsl:apply-templates/&gt;
    &lt;/div&gt;
  &lt;/xsl:template&gt;

&lt;/xsl:stylesheet&gt;</codeblock>
          <p><b>What this does:</b> Replaces the default note rendering with a
          <codeph>&lt;div class="callout callout-tip"&gt;</codeph> (or warning, caution, etc.)
          so CSS can style each type differently.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.4: CSS branding -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create <filepath>com.taskflow.html5/css/brand.css</filepath> with callout styles.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock>/* TaskFlow Documentation Branding */

/* Callout boxes for notes */
.callout {
  padding: 1rem 1.25rem;
  margin: 1rem 0;
  border-left: 4px solid #ccc;
  border-radius: 4px;
  background: #f8f9fa;
}

.callout-note {
  border-left-color: #0d6efd;
  background: #e8f0fe;
}

.callout-tip {
  border-left-color: #198754;
  background: #e8f5e9;
}

.callout-warning {
  border-left-color: #fd7e14;
  background: #fff3e0;
}

.callout-caution {
  border-left-color: #dc3545;
  background: #fde8e8;
}

.callout-important {
  border-left-color: #6f42c1;
  background: #f3e8fd;
}

/* Step styling */
.taskbody ol > li {
  margin-bottom: 0.75rem;
  line-height: 1.6;
}

/* Code blocks */
pre.codeblock {
  background: #1e1e1e;
  color: #d4d4d4;
  padding: 1rem;
  border-radius: 6px;
  overflow-x: auto;
  font-size: 0.9rem;
}</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.5: Install and test -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Install your plugin and build with it.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock># Copy plugin to DITA-OT plugins directory
cp -r com.taskflow.html5 "$(dita --install-dir)/plugins/"

# Integrate (registers the plugin)
dita --install

# Build using your custom transtype
dita -i taskflow-docs/taskflow.ditamap \
  -f taskflow-html5 \
  -o out/taskflow-branded</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>Open <filepath>out/taskflow-branded/index.html</filepath>. You should see:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>Notes rendered as colored callout boxes (blue, green, orange, red)</li>
            <li>Sidebar navigation (nav-toc=full is the default)</li>
            <li>Dark-themed code blocks</li>
          </ul>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.6: Add step enhancement -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Extend your XSLT to add anchor links to task steps.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Add this template to <filepath>override.xsl</filepath> (before the closing
          <codeph>&lt;/xsl:stylesheet&gt;</codeph>):</p>
          <codeblock>  &lt;!-- ============================================
       Lab B: Step Anchor Links
       Add self-linking anchors to task steps so
       users can share links to specific steps.
       ============================================ --&gt;
  &lt;xsl:template match="*[contains(@class, ' task/step ')]"&gt;
    &lt;li&gt;
      &lt;xsl:if test="@id"&gt;
        &lt;xsl:attribute name="id"&gt;&lt;xsl:value-of select="@id"/&gt;&lt;/xsl:attribute&gt;
      &lt;/xsl:if&gt;
      &lt;xsl:apply-templates/&gt;
    &lt;/li&gt;
  &lt;/xsl:template&gt;</codeblock>
          <p>Rebuild and verify that steps with <codeph>id</codeph> attributes get
          anchor-friendly HTML.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.7: Test with existing lab samples -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Test your plugin against the existing lab sample project.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock># Build the exercises lab-sample with your plugin
dita -i ../exercises/lab-sample.ditamap \
  -f taskflow-html5 \
  -o out/lab-test</codeblock>
          <p>The lab sample has all four note types. This validates your plugin works
          with content you did not author.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>All notes should render as styled callouts. If any fail, check your XSLT
          class matching and rebuild.</p>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 4.8: Debugging -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Practice debugging: intentionally break the XSLT and fix it.</cmd>
        <info>
          <ol>
            <li>Remove the closing <codeph>&lt;/xsl:attribute&gt;</codeph> tag from the note template</li>
            <li>Rebuild — observe the error message</li>
            <li>Fix the error, rebuild, and verify</li>
          </ol>
          <note type="tip">XSLT errors from DITA-OT can be cryptic. Key debugging strategies:
          (1) always check the temp directory for preprocessed files, (2) use
          <codeph>--debug</codeph> for verbose logging, (3) simplify your override to
          isolate the problem.</note>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps>

    <result>
      <p><b>Self-Check — you should now be able to:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>✓ Create a DITA-OT plugin from scratch with proper structure</li>
        <li>✓ Write <codeph>plugin.xml</codeph> with extension points and dependencies</li>
        <li>✓ Override XSLT templates using safe import patterns</li>
        <li>✓ Add custom CSS to branded output</li>
        <li>✓ Install, integrate, and test a plugin</li>
        <li>✓ Debug XSLT errors in DITA-OT builds</li>
      </ul>
      <note type="tip">Next step: explore the <codeph>com.extense.html5.labs</codeph>
      starter plugin in the <filepath>exercises/plugins/</filepath> directory for more
      advanced patterns including TOC overrides and sidebar toggles.</note>
    </result>
  </taskbody>
</task>
