<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="phase3-publishing-builds">
  <title>Phase 3W Exercise: Publishing, Filtering, and Multi-Variant Builds</title>
  <shortdesc>Build HTML5 and PDF output, apply DITAVAL filtering to create audience-specific variants, and configure build properties. Primary track for technical writers.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <audience type="user" experiencelevel="general"/>
      <othermeta name="persona" content="Writer"/>
      <othermeta name="phase" content="3W"/>
      <othermeta name="estimated-time" content="60-90 minutes"/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>
    <prereq>
      <ul>
        <li>Completed Phase 2 exercises (TaskFlow docs with map and reuse)</li>
        <li>Read Part 5 (Making Content Intelligent) and Part 6 (Publishing) topics</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <context>
      <p>In this exercise you will learn how to produce different output formats,
      filter content for different audiences, and create repeatable build configurations.
      These are the daily skills of a DITA publishing workflow.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>
      <!-- Exercise 3W.1: HTML5 with navigation -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Build HTML5 output with full sidebar navigation.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock>dita -i taskflow-docs/taskflow.ditamap -f html5 \
  -o out/taskflow-html5 \
  --nav-toc=full</codeblock>
          <p>The <codeph>--nav-toc=full</codeph> flag embeds a table of contents sidebar.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>Open <filepath>out/taskflow-html5/index.html</filepath>. You should see a left
          sidebar with your topichead groups and all topics listed.</p>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 3W.2: Add audience profiling -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Add audience profiling attributes to your TaskFlow topics.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Add <codeph>audience</codeph> attributes to specific content:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>In <filepath>what-is-taskflow.dita</filepath>, add a section with
            <codeph>audience="admin"</codeph> for administrative features</li>
            <li>In <filepath>cli-commands.dita</filepath>, add rows with
            <codeph>audience="admin"</codeph> for admin-only commands</li>
            <li>In <filepath>installing-taskflow.dita</filepath>, add a step with
            <codeph>audience="developer"</codeph> for developer SDK setup</li>
          </ul>
          <p><b>Example:</b></p>
          <codeblock>&lt;section audience="admin"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;Admin Features&lt;/title&gt;
  &lt;p&gt;TaskFlow administrators can manage teams, configure permissions,
  and view audit logs.&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;/section&gt;</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 3W.3: Create DITAVAL files -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create two DITAVAL filter files.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create <filepath>taskflow-docs/filters/end-user.ditaval</filepath>:</p>
          <codeblock>&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;val&gt;
  &lt;prop action="exclude" att="audience" val="admin"/&gt;
  &lt;prop action="exclude" att="audience" val="developer"/&gt;
&lt;/val&gt;</codeblock>
          <p>Create <filepath>taskflow-docs/filters/admin.ditaval</filepath>:</p>
          <codeblock>&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;
&lt;val&gt;
  &lt;prop action="include" att="audience" val="admin"/&gt;
  &lt;prop action="exclude" att="audience" val="developer"/&gt;
&lt;/val&gt;</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 3W.4: Build filtered variants -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Build two audience-specific variants of your documentation.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock># End-user variant (no admin content)
dita -i taskflow-docs/taskflow.ditamap -f html5 \
  -o out/taskflow-enduser \
  --filter=taskflow-docs/filters/end-user.ditaval \
  --nav-toc=full

# Admin variant (includes admin content)
dita -i taskflow-docs/taskflow.ditamap -f html5 \
  -o out/taskflow-admin \
  --filter=taskflow-docs/filters/admin.ditaval \
  --nav-toc=full</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>Compare the two outputs side by side:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>End-user output should NOT show admin sections or admin CLI commands</li>
            <li>Admin output should include admin content but exclude developer content</li>
          </ul>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 3W.5: Properties file -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Create a properties file for repeatable builds.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Create <filepath>taskflow-docs/build/html5-enduser.properties</filepath>:</p>
          <codeblock>args.input = taskflow.ditamap
output.dir = out/taskflow-enduser
transtype = html5
args.filter = filters/end-user.ditaval
nav-toc = full</codeblock>
          <p>Now you can build with a single flag:</p>
          <codeblock>cd taskflow-docs
dita --propertyfile=build/html5-enduser.properties</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>Same output as before, but now the build is reproducible and can be committed
          to version control.</p>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 3W.6: PDF output -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Build PDF output from the same source.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock>dita -i taskflow-docs/taskflow.ditamap -f pdf -o out/taskflow-pdf</codeblock>
          <note type="note">PDF output requires the default PDF plugin. If the build
          fails, check that you have a DITA-OT distribution that includes it (most do).</note>
        </info>
        <stepresult>
          <p>Open <filepath>out/taskflow-pdf/taskflow.pdf</filepath>. Content comes from the
          same source as HTML5 — this is single-source, multi-channel publishing.</p>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <!-- Exercise 3W.7: Metadata enrichment -->
      <step>
        <cmd>Add metadata to improve content findability.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Add a <codeph>&lt;prolog&gt;</codeph> section to each topic with:</p>
          <codeblock>&lt;prolog&gt;
  &lt;metadata&gt;
    &lt;keywords&gt;
      &lt;keyword&gt;TaskFlow&lt;/keyword&gt;
      &lt;keyword&gt;installation&lt;/keyword&gt;
      &lt;indexterm&gt;installing&lt;indexterm&gt;TaskFlow&lt;/indexterm&gt;&lt;/indexterm&gt;
    &lt;/keywords&gt;
  &lt;/metadata&gt;
&lt;/prolog&gt;</codeblock>
          <p>Rebuild and check HTML output — DITA-OT uses metadata for page titles,
          search indexing, and navigation breadcrumbs.</p>
        </info>
      </step>
    </steps>

    <result>
      <p><b>Self-Check — you should now be able to:</b></p>
      <ul>
        <li>✓ Build HTML5 and PDF from the same DITA source</li>
        <li>✓ Add audience profiling attributes to control content visibility</li>
        <li>✓ Create DITAVAL filter files for different audiences</li>
        <li>✓ Build audience-specific variants from one source</li>
        <li>✓ Use properties files for repeatable builds</li>
        <li>✓ Add metadata for findability and indexing</li>
      </ul>
    </result>
  </taskbody>
</task>
