<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="dita-information-typing" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Information Typing for AI: Intent Routing and Answer Formatting</title>
  <shortdesc>How DITA's concept, task, and reference types give AI systems the semantic signal to route user intent and format answers appropriately.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-02-10"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Information typing</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Concept topic</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Task topic</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Reference topic</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:intelligent-content</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="technical-writer"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="developer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="dita-information-typing"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT15M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="dita-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="dita-engineering"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="information-typing-basics"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <note type="tip">This topic explores how AI systems use DITA's information typing for intent routing and answer formatting. If you are new to information typing, start with <xref href="ch05-information-typing-basics.dita">Information Typing: Matching Content to Purpose</xref>, which covers the authoring fundamentals.</note>

    <section id="why-typing-matters">
      <title>Why does information typing matter for AI?</title>
      <p>When a user asks a chatbot a question, they have an <b>intent</b> — and different intents require different content types:</p>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="4">
          <colspec colname="question" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="intent" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="type" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="format" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>User question</entry>
              <entry>User intent</entry>
              <entry>DITA type</entry>
              <entry>How AI formats the answer</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>"What is conref?"</entry>
              <entry>Understand</entry>
              <entry>Concept</entry>
              <entry>Prose explanation with definition</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>"How do I install DITA-OT?"</entry>
              <entry>Do something</entry>
              <entry>Task</entry>
              <entry>Numbered steps with prerequisites</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>"What parameters does the HTML5 transform accept?"</entry>
              <entry>Look up</entry>
              <entry>Reference</entry>
              <entry>Parameter table with values</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>"What does this error mean?"</entry>
              <entry>Troubleshoot</entry>
              <entry>Reference</entry>
              <entry>Problem/cause/solution format</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
      <p>Without information typing, the AI cannot distinguish these content types — it treats everything as undifferentiated text and formats all answers the same way.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="concept-type">
      <title>Concept topics: Explaining ideas</title>
      <p>A concept topic answers "what is..." and "why does..." questions. It uses <codeph>&lt;conbody&gt;</codeph> for narrative prose, organized into titled <codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph> elements.</p>
      <p><b>Before (unstructured XML) — no type signal:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;article&gt;
  &lt;h1&gt;Content Reuse in DITA&lt;/h1&gt;
  &lt;p&gt;Content reuse is one of DITA's most powerful features.
  It allows you to write content once and reference it
  from multiple locations...&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;/article&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>After (DITA concept) — explicitly typed:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml"><ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;concept id="dita-reuse-variants"&gt;</ph>
  &lt;title&gt;Reuse, Keys, and Variant Management&lt;/title&gt;
  <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;shortdesc&gt;How to write content once and assemble it into
    multiple deliverables using conref, keyref, and DITAVAL
    filtering.&lt;/shortdesc&gt;</ph>
  <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;conbody&gt;</ph>
    <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;section id="why-reuse-matters"&gt;</ph>
      &lt;title&gt;Why does content reuse matter?&lt;/title&gt;
      &lt;p&gt;Content reuse is one of DITA's most powerful
        features...&lt;/p&gt;
    &lt;/section&gt;
  &lt;/conbody&gt;
&lt;/concept&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>AI benefit:</b> The chatbot knows this is an explanation. It retrieves this topic for "what is..." questions and formats the answer as explanatory prose, not as steps.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="task-type">
      <title>Task topics: Teaching procedures</title>
      <p>A task topic answers "how do I..." questions. DITA tasks enforce a specific structure: <codeph>&lt;prereq&gt;</codeph> → <codeph>&lt;context&gt;</codeph> → <codeph>&lt;steps&gt;</codeph> → <codeph>&lt;result&gt;</codeph> → <codeph>&lt;postreq&gt;</codeph>.</p>
      <p><b>Before (unstructured XML) — steps look like any list:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;article&gt;
  &lt;h1&gt;Installing DITA-OT&lt;/h1&gt;

  &lt;h2&gt;Prerequisites&lt;/h2&gt;
  &lt;ul&gt;&lt;li&gt;Java 17 or later&lt;/li&gt;&lt;/ul&gt;

  &lt;h2&gt;Steps&lt;/h2&gt;
  &lt;ol&gt;
    &lt;li&gt;Download from dita-ot.org&lt;/li&gt;
    &lt;li&gt;Unzip to your preferred location&lt;/li&gt;
    &lt;li&gt;Add bin/ to your PATH&lt;/li&gt;
    &lt;li&gt;Verify with &lt;code&gt;dita --version&lt;/code&gt;&lt;/li&gt;
  &lt;/ol&gt;
&lt;/article&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>After (DITA task) — steps are semantically structured:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml"><ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;task id="installing-dita-ot"&gt;</ph>
  &lt;title&gt;Installing DITA-OT&lt;/title&gt;
  <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;shortdesc&gt;Download, install, and verify DITA Open Toolkit
    4.x on your machine.&lt;/shortdesc&gt;</ph>
  <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;taskbody&gt;</ph>
    <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;prereq&gt;</ph>
      &lt;ul&gt;
        &lt;li&gt;&lt;b&gt;Java 17 or later&lt;/b&gt; — check with
          &lt;codeph&gt;java -version&lt;/codeph&gt;&lt;/li&gt;
      &lt;/ul&gt;
    &lt;/prereq&gt;
    <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;steps&gt;</ph>
      <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;step&gt;</ph>
        <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;cmd&gt;</ph>Download the latest release from
          dita-ot.org&lt;/cmd&gt;
        <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;info&gt;</ph>Choose the .zip distribution&lt;/info&gt;
      &lt;/step&gt;
      &lt;step&gt;
        &lt;cmd&gt;Unzip to your preferred location&lt;/cmd&gt;
        <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;stepresult&gt;You should see a dita-ot-4.x/
          directory&lt;/stepresult&gt;</ph>
      &lt;/step&gt;
      &lt;step&gt;
        &lt;cmd&gt;Add the bin/ directory to your
          PATH&lt;/cmd&gt;
      &lt;/step&gt;
    &lt;/steps&gt;
    <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;result&gt;</ph>
      &lt;p&gt;Verify the installation:
        &lt;codeph&gt;dita --version&lt;/codeph&gt; should
        print the version number.&lt;/p&gt;
    &lt;/result&gt;
  &lt;/taskbody&gt;
&lt;/task&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>AI benefit:</b> The chatbot extracts structured steps. It can present prerequisites separately. It knows the expected result. It formats the answer as a numbered procedure with clear pre/post conditions.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="reference-type">
      <title>Reference topics: Lookup information</title>
      <p>A reference topic answers "what are the options for..." questions. It uses <codeph>&lt;refbody&gt;</codeph> with tables, property lists, and syntax references.</p>
      <p><b>Before (unstructured XML) — a table that looks like any table:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;article&gt;
  &lt;h1&gt;DITA-OT Parameters&lt;/h1&gt;
  &lt;table&gt;
    &lt;tr&gt;&lt;th&gt;Parameter&lt;/th&gt;&lt;th&gt;Description&lt;/th&gt;&lt;th&gt;Default&lt;/th&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;
    &lt;tr&gt;&lt;td&gt;args.input&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;Input file&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;—&lt;/td&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;
    &lt;tr&gt;&lt;td&gt;output.dir&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;Output directory&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;out/&lt;/td&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;
    &lt;tr&gt;&lt;td&gt;transtype&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;Transform type&lt;/td&gt;&lt;td&gt;html5&lt;/td&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;
  &lt;/table&gt;
&lt;/article&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>After (DITA reference) — semantically typed lookup:</b></p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml"><ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;reference id="dita-ot-parameters"&gt;</ph>
  &lt;title&gt;DITA-OT Build Parameters Reference&lt;/title&gt;
  <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;shortdesc&gt;Complete reference of DITA-OT build parameters
    for the HTML5 and PDF transforms.&lt;/shortdesc&gt;</ph>
  <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;refbody&gt;</ph>
    &lt;table&gt;
      <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;tgroup cols="3"&gt;</ph>
        <ph outputclass="hi-yellow">&lt;thead&gt;</ph>
          &lt;row&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Parameter&lt;/entry&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Description&lt;/entry&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Default&lt;/entry&gt;
          &lt;/row&gt;
        &lt;/thead&gt;
        &lt;tbody&gt;
          &lt;row&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;&lt;codeph&gt;args.input&lt;/codeph&gt;&lt;/entry&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Path to the input DITA map&lt;/entry&gt;
            &lt;entry&gt;Required&lt;/entry&gt;
          &lt;/row&gt;
          ...
        &lt;/tbody&gt;
      &lt;/tgroup&gt;
    &lt;/table&gt;
  &lt;/refbody&gt;
&lt;/reference&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>AI benefit:</b> The chatbot knows this is lookup data. It formats the answer as a table or parameterized list. It can extract specific parameter values when users ask about individual parameters.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="intent-routing">
      <title>How information typing enables intent routing</title>
      <p>With typed topics and the <codeph>content-intent</codeph> metadata value, the AI can build an intent-routing pipeline:</p>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="pattern" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="intent" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="action" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>User query pattern</entry>
              <entry>Detected intent</entry>
              <entry>AI retrieval filter</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>"What is...", "Explain...", "Describe..."</entry>
              <entry>explain</entry>
              <entry>Filter for <codeph>content-intent="explain"</codeph></entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>"How do I...", "Steps to...", "Guide me..."</entry>
              <entry>how-to</entry>
              <entry>Filter for <codeph>content-intent="how-to"</codeph></entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>"List all...", "What are the options..."</entry>
              <entry>reference</entry>
              <entry>Filter for <codeph>content-intent="reference"</codeph></entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>"Error...", "Not working...", "Fix..."</entry>
              <entry>troubleshoot</entry>
              <entry>Filter for <codeph>content-intent="troubleshoot"</codeph></entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>"Best practice...", "Should I..."</entry>
              <entry>best-practice</entry>
              <entry>Filter for <codeph>content-intent="best-practice"</codeph></entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
      <p>This is impossible with unstructured XML — the AI must examine every document equally, regardless of whether it is a concept, task, or reference.</p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
