<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="xml-elements-attributes" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Elements, Attributes, and the XML Tree</title>
  <shortdesc>XML documents are built from elements and attributes that form a hierarchical tree structure — understanding this tree is the key to working with XML effectively.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-04-05"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>XML elements</indexterm>
        <indexterm>XML attributes</indexterm>
        <indexterm>XML tree</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Document tree</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Parent element</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Child element</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:xml-fundamentals</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="xml-training" appname="chatbot" id="xml-elements-attributes"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="beginner"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT15M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="xml-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="xml-syntax-rules"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="elements">
      <title>Elements: The building blocks of XML</title>
      <p>An element is the fundamental unit of XML. It consists of a start tag, content, and an end tag:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;title&gt;Learning XML&lt;/title&gt;
  ↑         ↑             ↑
start tag  content      end tag</codeblock>
      <p>Elements can contain:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Text content:</b> <codeph>&lt;name&gt;Jane Smith&lt;/name&gt;</codeph></li>
        <li><b>Child elements:</b> <codeph>&lt;address&gt;&lt;city&gt;Austin&lt;/city&gt;&lt;/address&gt;</codeph></li>
        <li><b>Mixed content:</b> <codeph>&lt;p&gt;Click &lt;b&gt;Save&lt;/b&gt; to confirm.&lt;/p&gt;</codeph></li>
        <li><b>Nothing (empty):</b> <codeph>&lt;linebreak/&gt;</codeph></li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="naming-rules">
      <title>Element naming rules</title>
      <p>XML element names must follow these rules:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Must start with a letter or underscore (<codeph>_</codeph>)</li>
        <li>Can contain letters, digits, hyphens, underscores, and periods</li>
        <li>Cannot start with the letters <codeph>xml</codeph> (reserved)</li>
        <li>Cannot contain spaces</li>
        <li>Are case-sensitive</li>
      </ul>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!-- VALID element names --&gt;
&lt;firstName&gt;  &lt;first-name&gt;  &lt;first_name&gt;  &lt;_internal&gt;

&lt;!-- INVALID element names --&gt;
&lt;1stName&gt;    &lt;first name&gt;  &lt;xml-data&gt;</codeblock>
      <note type="tip">Choose a consistent naming convention for your XML vocabulary. Common styles: <codeph>camelCase</codeph>, <codeph>kebab-case</codeph>, or <codeph>snake_case</codeph>. DITA uses kebab-case for file names and camelCase for some attribute values.</note>
    </section>

    <section id="attributes">
      <title>Attributes: Metadata on elements</title>
      <p>Attributes provide additional information about an element. They appear inside the start tag as name-value pairs:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;book isbn="978-0-13-468599-1" format="hardcover"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;The Pragmatic Programmer&lt;/title&gt;
&lt;/book&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>Key rules for attributes:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Values must be quoted (single or double quotes)</li>
        <li>An element cannot have duplicate attribute names</li>
        <li>Attribute order does not matter</li>
        <li>Attributes cannot contain child elements — they hold simple values only</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="element-vs-attribute">
      <title>When to use elements vs. attributes</title>
      <p>A common design question: should data be an element or an attribute? Here are guidelines:</p>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="2">
          <colspec colname="element" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="attribute" colwidth="1*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Use an element when...</entry>
              <entry>Use an attribute when...</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>The data has sub-structure</entry>
              <entry>The data is a simple value (ID, type, status)</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>The data might contain markup</entry>
              <entry>The data qualifies or classifies the element</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>The data can repeat (multiple values)</entry>
              <entry>The data appears at most once per element</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>The data is the primary content</entry>
              <entry>The data is metadata about the content</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
      <note type="tip">When in doubt, use elements. They are more flexible and can be extended later without breaking existing documents.</note>
    </section>

    <section id="tree-structure">
      <title>The XML document tree</title>
      <p>Every XML document forms a tree (also called the <b>document object model</b> or <b>DOM</b>). Understanding the tree is essential for navigation using XPath and for understanding schema validation.</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;library&gt;
  &lt;section name="fiction"&gt;
    &lt;book&gt;
      &lt;title&gt;Dune&lt;/title&gt;
      &lt;author&gt;Frank Herbert&lt;/author&gt;
    &lt;/book&gt;
    &lt;book&gt;
      &lt;title&gt;Neuromancer&lt;/title&gt;
      &lt;author&gt;William Gibson&lt;/author&gt;
    &lt;/book&gt;
  &lt;/section&gt;
&lt;/library&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>The tree relationships:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><codeph>&lt;library&gt;</codeph> is the <b>root</b> element</li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph> is a <b>child</b> of <codeph>&lt;library&gt;</codeph></li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;library&gt;</codeph> is the <b>parent</b> of <codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph></li>
        <li>The two <codeph>&lt;book&gt;</codeph> elements are <b>siblings</b></li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph> and <codeph>&lt;author&gt;</codeph> are <b>children</b> of <codeph>&lt;book&gt;</codeph></li>
        <li><codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph> is a <b>descendant</b> of <codeph>&lt;library&gt;</codeph></li>
      </ul>
      <p>These terms — root, parent, child, sibling, descendant, ancestor — are the vocabulary you will use throughout XML, XPath, XSLT, and DITA.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="namespaces-preview">
      <title>A preview: XML Namespaces</title>
      <p>When different XML vocabularies are combined in one document, names can collide. XML Namespaces solve this by prefixing element names with a URI-based identifier:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
      xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"&gt;
  &lt;body&gt;
    &lt;svg:svg width="100" height="100"&gt;
      &lt;svg:circle cx="50" cy="50" r="40"/&gt;
    &lt;/svg:svg&gt;
  &lt;/body&gt;
&lt;/html&gt;</codeblock>
      <p>You will encounter namespaces when working with XSD schemas (which use the <codeph>xs:</codeph> or <codeph>xsd:</codeph> prefix) and when combining multiple XML standards in one document.</p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
