<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="xml-namespaces" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>XML Namespaces</title>
  <shortdesc>Namespaces prevent naming conflicts when XML vocabularies from different sources are combined in a single document by qualifying element and attribute names with a unique URI.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-04-05"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>XML namespaces</indexterm>
        <indexterm>xmlns</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Namespace prefix</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Default namespace</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:xml-fundamentals</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="xml-training" appname="chatbot" id="xml-namespaces"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="beginner"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT15M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="xml-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="explain"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="medium"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="xml-elements-attributes"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="the-problem">
      <title>Why do we need namespaces?</title>
      <p>Imagine two XML vocabularies that both define a <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph> element — one for books and one for job titles. When these vocabularies appear in the same document, a parser cannot tell which <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph> is which. Namespaces solve this by giving each vocabulary a unique identifier.</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;!-- Without namespaces: ambiguous --&gt;
&lt;record&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;Learning XML&lt;/title&gt;       &lt;!-- Book title? --&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;Senior Engineer&lt;/title&gt;    &lt;!-- Job title? --&gt;
&lt;/record&gt;</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="declaring-namespaces">
      <title>Declaring namespaces</title>
      <p>A namespace is declared using the <codeph>xmlns</codeph> attribute. There are two forms:</p>
      <p><b>Default namespace</b> — applies to the element and all descendants without a prefix:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;bookstore xmlns="http://example.com/books"&gt;
  &lt;title&gt;Learning XML&lt;/title&gt;  &lt;!-- in the books namespace --&gt;
&lt;/bookstore&gt;</codeblock>
      <p><b>Prefixed namespace</b> — uses a short prefix to identify elements from a specific vocabulary:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;record xmlns:bk="http://example.com/books"
        xmlns:hr="http://example.com/hr"&gt;
  &lt;bk:title&gt;Learning XML&lt;/bk:title&gt;       &lt;!-- Book title --&gt;
  &lt;hr:title&gt;Senior Engineer&lt;/hr:title&gt;    &lt;!-- Job title --&gt;
&lt;/record&gt;</codeblock>
      <note type="important">The namespace URI is just an identifier — it does not need to point to an actual web page. By convention, organizations use their domain name to ensure uniqueness.</note>
    </section>

    <section id="namespace-scope">
      <title>Namespace scope</title>
      <p>A namespace declaration is in scope for the element where it is declared and all of that element's descendants. You can override a namespace on a child element:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;root xmlns="http://example.com/default"&gt;
  &lt;child&gt;In default namespace&lt;/child&gt;
  &lt;other xmlns="http://example.com/other"&gt;
    &lt;child&gt;In other namespace&lt;/child&gt;
  &lt;/other&gt;
&lt;/root&gt;</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="common-namespaces">
      <title>Common namespaces you will encounter</title>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="prefix" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="uri" colwidth="3*"/>
          <colspec colname="used" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Prefix</entry>
              <entry>Namespace URI</entry>
              <entry>Used for</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>xs:</codeph> or <codeph>xsd:</codeph></entry>
              <entry>http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema</entry>
              <entry>XML Schema Definition (XSD)</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>xsl:</codeph></entry>
              <entry>http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform</entry>
              <entry>XSLT transformations</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>xhtml:</codeph></entry>
              <entry>http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml</entry>
              <entry>XHTML documents</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>svg:</codeph></entry>
              <entry>http://www.w3.org/2000/svg</entry>
              <entry>SVG vector graphics</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="namespaces-and-dita">
      <title>Namespaces in DITA</title>
      <p>DITA topics typically do not use namespace prefixes because DITA has its own vocabulary that does not collide with other schemas. However, you will encounter namespaces when:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Writing XSLT stylesheets that transform DITA content</li>
        <li>Working with XSD-based DITA grammar files (DITA 1.3+ uses RELAX NG and XSD grammars)</li>
        <li>Embedding foreign content (such as MathML or SVG) within DITA topics</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
