<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<!--
  Extense LLC — AI-Ready Content Authoring Guide
  Purpose: Team guidelines for writing DITA content that is optimized for
           chatbot/RAG retrieval, AI classification, and intelligent delivery.
-->
<concept id="ai-ready-authoring-guide" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>AI-Ready Content Authoring Guide</title>
  <shortdesc>Guidelines for writing DITA content that is optimized for the Extense chatbot, RAG retrieval, and AI-driven content delivery.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2026-02-10"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>AI-ready content</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Chatbot optimization</indexterm>
        <indexterm>RAG authoring</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Intelligent content</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:intelligent-content</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="all"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="ai-ready-authoring-guide"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="dita-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="best-practice"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
  </prolog>
  <conbody>

    <section id="why-ai-ready-content">
      <title>Why AI-ready content matters</title>
      <p>The Extense chatbot uses <b>Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)</b> to answer user questions. It works by:</p>
      <ol>
        <li><b>Chunking</b> your DITA content into sections</li>
        <li><b>Embedding</b> each chunk as a vector in a database</li>
        <li><b>Retrieving</b> the most relevant chunks for a user's question</li>
        <li><b>Generating</b> an answer grounded in those chunks</li>
      </ol>
      <p>The <b>quality of the chatbot's answers depends directly on the quality of your content</b>. Well-structured, well-metadata'd DITA content produces better retrieval and better answers.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="prolog-metadata-requirements">
      <title>Required prolog metadata</title>
      <p>Every topic <b>must</b> include these elements in the prolog for chatbot ingestion:</p>
      <table>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="element" colwidth="1*"/>
          <colspec colname="purpose" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="example" colwidth="2*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Element</entry>
              <entry>Purpose for chatbot</entry>
              <entry>Example</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>xml:lang</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Language detection for NLP processing</entry>
              <entry><codeph>xml:lang="en-US"</codeph> on root element</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>&lt;shortdesc&gt;</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Used as chunk summary in retrieval results</entry>
              <entry>One clear sentence describing the topic's purpose</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>&lt;critdates&gt;</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Content freshness signals for ranking</entry>
              <entry><codeph>&lt;created date="2026-01-15"/&gt;</codeph></entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>&lt;indexterm&gt;</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Keyword matching in vector search</entry>
              <entry>3-6 specific terms per topic</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>&lt;data name="difficulty"&gt;</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Filters results by user level</entry>
              <entry>beginner | intermediate | advanced | expert</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>&lt;data name="content-domain"&gt;</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Routes questions to the right content area</entry>
              <entry>dita-fundamentals | authoring | publishing | customization</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>&lt;data name="content-intent"&gt;</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Matches user intent to content type</entry>
              <entry>explain | how-to | reference | troubleshoot | tutorial</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><codeph>&lt;data name="service-line"&gt;</codeph></entry>
              <entry>Links content to Extense service offerings</entry>
              <entry>dita-engineering | publishing-engineering | training</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="writing-for-retrieval">
      <title>Writing for retrieval quality</title>
      <p>These authoring practices improve chatbot answer quality:</p>
      <ol>
        <li><b>Write clear shortdescs.</b> The shortdesc is prepended to every chunk from that topic. A vague shortdesc degrades every chunk.</li>
        <li><b>Use section titles as questions.</b> Instead of "Publishing Overview", use "How does DITA publishing work?" — this matches how users ask the chatbot.</li>
        <li><b>Keep sections focused.</b> One section = one concept. The chunking pipeline splits at section boundaries.</li>
        <li><b>Front-load key information.</b> The first 1-2 sentences of each section are the most important for retrieval ranking.</li>
        <li><b>Use DITA terms consistently.</b> The glossary is used for term resolution — always use the canonical glossterm form.</li>
        <li><b>Include code examples.</b> Codeblocks with <codeph>outputclass="language-*"</codeph> are preserved in chunks and are highly valued in retrieval.</li>
        <li><b>Add indexterms for synonyms.</b> If users might search for "filter" or "conditional processing", include both as indexterms even if the topic title says "DITAVAL."</li>
      </ol>
    </section>

    <section id="chunking-boundaries">
      <title>Understanding chunking boundaries</title>
      <p>The ingestion pipeline chunks content at <b>section boundaries</b>. Each chunk:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Inherits the topic's title, shortdesc, and all prolog metadata</li>
        <li>Gets its own section title and section ID</li>
        <li>Is sized between 50 and 1500 tokens (large sections are split by paragraph)</li>
        <li>Is prefixed with the topic title + section title for embedding context</li>
      </ul>
      <p>To optimize chunking:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Give every <codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph> both an <codeph>@id</codeph> and a <codeph>&lt;title&gt;</codeph></li>
        <li>Keep sections between 200-1200 tokens (roughly 1-6 paragraphs)</li>
        <li>Avoid sections that are just a single sentence</li>
        <li>Put related information in the same section rather than splitting across multiple</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="glossary-contribution">
      <title>Contributing to the glossary</title>
      <p>The glossary serves as the chatbot's <b>term resolution engine</b>. When adding terms:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Always include <codeph>&lt;glossSurfaceForm&gt;</codeph> (the full/formal name)</li>
        <li>Add <codeph>&lt;glossAlt&gt;&lt;glossAbbreviation&gt;</codeph> for common abbreviations</li>
        <li>Write <codeph>&lt;glossUsage&gt;</codeph> as practical guidance, not just definitions</li>
        <li>Include <codeph>&lt;glossScopeNote&gt;</codeph> for version applicability and context</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="ingestion-pipeline">
      <title>Running the ingestion pipeline</title>
      <p>After updating content, regenerate the chatbot data:</p>
      <codeblock outputclass="language-bash">
# From the organized-dita-docs directory:
python3 dita-topics/intelligent-content/dita-to-chatbot-json.py \
  --input dita-topics \
  --output dita-topics/intelligent-content/chatbot-data \
  --format jsonl
      </codeblock>
      <p>This produces:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><codeph>chunks.jsonl</codeph> — Embed into your vector database</li>
        <li><codeph>content-manifest.json</codeph> — Topic index for the chatbot navigator</li>
        <li><codeph>glossary-index.json</codeph> — Term lookup for the chatbot</li>
        <li><codeph>ingestion-report.json</codeph> — Quality metrics and statistics</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
