<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="metadata-enrichment" xml:lang="en-US">
  <title>Metadata Enrichment: Adding the AI Layer to Every Topic</title>
  <shortdesc>Step-by-step process for adding the complete AI-ready prolog metadata to DITA topics — the single highest-impact action for improving chatbot retrieval quality.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Extense LLC</author>
    <critdates><created date="2026-02-10"/></critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Metadata enrichment</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Prolog metadata</indexterm>
        <indexterm>AI metadata</indexterm>
        <indexterm>Batch enrichment</indexterm>
      </keywords>
      <category>taxonomy:intelligent-content</category>
      <audience type="user" othertype="technical-writer"/>
      <audience type="user" othertype="developer"/>
    </metadata>
    <resourceid appid="extense-training" appname="chatbot" id="metadata-enrichment"/>
    <data name="difficulty" value="intermediate"/>
    <data name="duration" value="PT20M"/>
    <data name="content-domain" value="dita-fundamentals"/>
    <data name="content-intent" value="how-to"/>
    <data name="chatbot-priority" value="high"/>
    <data name="service-line" value="structured-content-strategy"/>
    <data name="prerequisites" value="taxonomy-controlled-vocabulary"/>
  </prolog>
  <taskbody>

    <context>
      <p>Metadata enrichment is the process of adding classification, audience, difficulty, intent, and priority metadata to every topic in your DITA corpus. This metadata is what transforms DITA from a structured document format into an <b>AI-addressable content system</b>.</p>
      <p>In the Extense training guide, enriching 34 sub-topics with full metadata raised the AI-readiness score from 7.2/10 to 9.2/10 and increased metadata coverage from 24% to 100%.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>
      <step>
        <cmd>Audit every topic and document the current metadata state.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Use grep or a script to check each file for the required metadata fields:</p>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Count files with full metadata
grep -rl 'chatbot-priority' dita-topics/ | wc -l

# Count files missing metadata
grep -rL 'chatbot-priority' dita-topics/ --include="*.dita" | wc -l</codeblock>
          <p>Create a spreadsheet documenting each file's current metadata state and the values that need to be assigned.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>A complete inventory of which topics have metadata and which need enrichment.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd>Read each topic and determine contextually appropriate metadata values.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>For each topic, decide:</p>
          <ul>
            <li><b>Audience:</b> Who is this written for? Developer? Technical writer? All?</li>
            <li><b>Difficulty:</b> What knowledge level is required? Beginner? Advanced?</li>
            <li><b>Content domain:</b> What subject area? Publishing? Customization? DevOps?</li>
            <li><b>Content intent:</b> What does this content do? Explain? Instruct? Reference?</li>
            <li><b>Chatbot priority:</b> How likely are users to ask about this? High? Medium? Low?</li>
            <li><b>Service line:</b> Which business service does this relate to?</li>
            <li><b>Prerequisites:</b> What should the reader know before reading this?</li>
            <li><b>Duration:</b> How long does it take to read/complete this content?</li>
          </ul>
          <p>All values must come from the controlled vocabulary defined in the subject scheme.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd>Apply metadata to each topic, either manually or using an enrichment script.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p><b>Manual approach:</b> Open each file and add the full prolog block. Best for small batches (under 10 topics).</p>
          <p><b>Scripted approach:</b> For larger batches, create a Python script that reads each file, determines the topic type, and replaces the lean prolog with the full AI-ready prolog. Example:</p>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-python">import re

def enrich_topic(filepath, metadata):
    with open(filepath, 'r') as f:
        content = f.read()

    # Extract topic ID from root element
    topic_id = re.search(
        r'id="([^"]+)"', content
    ).group(1)

    # Add xml:lang if missing
    if 'xml:lang=' not in content:
        content = re.sub(
            r'(id="[^"]+")',
            r'\1 xml:lang="en-US"',
            content, count=1
        )

    # Build new prolog and replace existing
    new_prolog = build_prolog(topic_id, metadata)
    content = re.sub(
        r'&lt;prolog&gt;.*?&lt;/prolog&gt;',
        new_prolog,
        content, flags=re.DOTALL
    )

    with open(filepath, 'w') as f:
        f.write(content)</codeblock>
          <p>This scripted approach was used to enrich all 34 sub-topics in the Extense training guide in a single batch operation.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>Every topic has the complete AI-ready prolog metadata.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step>
        <cmd>Verify the enrichment by checking that all required fields are present.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock outputclass="language-bash"># Verify all 7 key fields across all topics
for field in xml:lang chatbot-priority resourceid \
  content-domain critdates category audience; do
  echo "=== $field ==="
  grep -rl "$field" dita-topics/ --include="*.dita" | wc -l
done</codeblock>
          <p>The count for each field should match the total number of topic files.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>Confirmed 100% metadata coverage across the entire corpus.</stepresult>
      </step>
    </steps>

    <result>
      <p>After enrichment, every topic in the corpus produces <b>metadata-rich chunks</b> in the RAG pipeline. The chatbot can now:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Filter by audience, difficulty, and domain in every query</li>
        <li>Route user intent to the correct content type</li>
        <li>Apply priority weighting to rank the most useful content first</li>
        <li>Suggest prerequisites and next steps in learning paths</li>
        <li>Use freshness dates to prefer newer content</li>
      </ul>
    </result>

  </taskbody>
</task>
